Republic Act No. 9184
1
THE GOVERNMENT
PROCUREMENT REFORM ACT
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9184
Republic Act No. 9184
2
H. No. 4809
S. No. 2248
Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Twelfth Congress
Second Regular Session
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty -second day of July,
two thousand two.
[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9184]1
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE MODERNIZATION, STANDARDIZATION
AND REGULATION OF THE PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. Short Title. – This Act shall be known as the “Government
Procurement Reform Act.”
SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. – It is the declared policy of the State to promote
the ideals of good governance in all its branches, departments, agencies, subdivisions, and
instrumentalities, including government-owned and/or -controlled corporations, and local
government units.
SEC. 3. Governing Principles on Government Procurement. – All
procurement of the national government, its departments, bureaus, offices and agencies,
including state universities and colleges, government-owned and/or -controlled corporations,
government financial institutions and local government units, shall, in all cases, be governed
by these principles:
(a) Transparency in the procurement process and in the implementation of
procurement contracts.
(b) Competitiveness by extending equal opportunity to enable private contracting
parties who are eligible and qualified to participate in public bidding.

1 Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9184 was signed by Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo on 10 January 2003, and was
published on 11 January 2003, in two (2) newspapers of general nationwide circulation, namely, Manila Times and Malaya. It
took effect fifteen (15) days after its publication or on 26 January 2003.
Republic Act No. 9184
3
(c) Streamlined procurement process that will uniformly apply to all government
procurement. The procurement process shall be simple and made adaptable to advances in
modern technology in order to ensure an effective and efficient method.
(d) System of accountability where both the public officials directly or indirectly
involved in the procurement process as well as in the implementation of procurement
contracts and the private parties that deal with government are, when warranted by
circumstances, investigated and held liable for their actions relative thereto.
(e) Public monitoring of the procurement process and the implementation of
awarded contracts with the end in view of guaranteeing that these contracts are awarded
pursuant to the provisions of this Act and its implementing rules and regulations, and that all
these contracts are performed strictly according to specifications.
SEC. 4. Scope and Application. – This Act shall apply to the Procurement of
Infrastructure Projects, Goods, and Consulting Services, regardless of source of funds,
whether local or foreign, by all branches and instrumentalities of government, its
departments, offices and agencies, including government-owned and/or -controlled
corporations and local government units, subject to the provisions of Commonwealth Act No.
138. Any treaty or international or executive agreement affecting the subject matter of this
Act to which the Philippine government is a signatory shall be observed.
SEC. 5. Definition of Terms. – For purposes of this Act, the following terms or
words and phrases shall mean or be understood as follows:
(a) Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) – refers to the budget for the
contract duly approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity, as provided for in the General
Appropriations Act and/or continuing appropriations, in the case of National Government
Agencies; the Corporate Budget for the contract approved by the governing Boards,
pursuant to E.O. No. 518, series of 1979, in the case of Government-Owned and/or -
Controlled Corporations, Government Financial Institutions and State Universities and
Colleges; and the Budget for the contract approved by the respective Sanggunian, in the
case of Local Government Units.
(b) BAC – refers to the Bids and Awards Committee established in accordance with
Article V of this Act.
(c) Bidding Documents – refers to documents issued by the Procuring Entity as the
basis for Bids, furnishing all information necessary for a prospective bidder to prepare a bid
for the Goods, Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting Services to be provided.
(d) Bid – refers to a signed offer or proposal submitted by a supplier,
manufacturer, distributor, contractor or consultant in response to the Bidding Documents.
(e) Competitive Bidding – refers to a method of procurement which is open to
participation by any interested party and which consists of the following processes:
advertisement, pre-bid conference, eligibility screening of prospective bidders, receipt and
opening of bids, evaluation of bids, post-qualification, and award of contract, the specific
requirements and mechanics of which shall be defined in the IRR to be promulgated under
this Act.
(f) Consulting Services – refer to services for Infrastructure Projects and other
types of projects or activities of the Government requiring adequate external technical and
Republic Act No. 9184
4
professional expertise that are beyond the capability and/or capacity of the government to
undertake such as, but not limited to: (i) advisory and review services; (ii) pre-investment or
feasibility studies; (iii) design; (iv) construction supervision; (v) management and related
services; and (vi) other technical services or special studies.
(g) G-EPS – refers to the Government Electronic Procurement System as provided
in Section 8 of this Act.
(h) Goods – refer to all items, supplies, materials and general support services,
except consulting services and infrastructure projects, which may be needed in the
transaction of public businesses or in the pursuit of any government undertaking, project or
activity, whether in the nature of equipment, furniture, stationery, materials for
construction, or personal property of any kind, including non-personal or contractual
services such as the repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, as well as trucking,
hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous services, as well as procurement of
materials and supplies provided by the procuring entity for such services.
(i) GPPB – refers to the Government Procurement Policy Board established in
accordance with Article XX of this Act.
(j) Head of the Procuring Entity – refers to: (i) the head of the agency or his duly
authorized official, for national government agencies; (ii) the governing board or its duly
authorized official, for government-owned and/or -controlled corporations; or (iii) the local
chief executive, for local government units. Provided, That in a department, office or
agency where the procurement is decentralized, the Head of each decentralized unit shall be
considered as the Head of the Procuring Entity subject to the limitations and authority
delegated by the head of the department, office or agency.
(k) Infrastructure Projects – include the construction, improvement, rehabilitation,
demolition, repair, restoration or maintenance of roads and bridges, railways, airports,
seaports, communication facilities, civil works components of information technology
projects, irrigation, flood control and drainage, water supply, sanitation, sewerage and solid
waste management systems, shore protection, energy/power and electrification facilities,
national buildings, school buildings, hospital buildings and other related construction
projects of the government.
(l) IRR – refer to the implementing rules and regulations to be promulgated in
accordance with Section 75 this Act.
(m) Portal – refers to a website that aggregates a wide variety of content for the
purpose of attracting a large number of users.
(n) Procurement – refers to the acquisition of Goods, Consulting Services, and the
contracting for Infrastructure Projects by the Procuring Entity. Procurement shall also
include the lease of goods and real estate. With respect to real property, its procurement
shall be governed by the provisions of Republic Act No. 8974, entitled “An Act to Facilitate
the Acquisition of Right-of-Way Site or Location for National Government Infrastructure
Projects and for Other Purposes”, and other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
(o) Procuring Entity - refers to any branch, department, office, agency, or
instrumentality of the government, including state universities and colleges, governmentowned and/or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and local
government units procuring Goods, Consulting Services and Infrastructure Projects.
Republic Act No. 9184
5
SEC. 6. Standardization of Procurement Process and Forms. – To systematize
the procurement process, avoid confusion and ensure transparency, the procurement
process, including the forms to be used, shall be standardized insofar as practicable.
For this purpose, the GPPB shall pursue the development of generic procurement
manuals and standard bidding forms, the use of which once issued shall be mandatory upon
all Procuring Entities.
ARTICLE II
PROCUREMENT PLANNING
SEC. 7. Procurement Planning and Budgeting Linkage. – All procurement
should be within the approved budget of the Procuring Entity and should be meticulously
and judiciously planned by the Procuring Entity concerned. Consistent with government
fiscal discipline measures, only those considered crucial to the efficient discharge of
governmental functions shall be included in the Annual Procurement Plan to be specified in
the IRR.
No government Procurement shall be undertaken unless it is in accordance with the
approved Annual Procurement Plan of the Procuring Entity. The Annual Procurement Plan
shall be approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity and must be consistent with its duly
approved yearly budget. The Annual Procurement Plan shall be formulated and revised only
in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the IRR. In the case of Infrastructure Projects,
the Plan shall include engineering design and acquisition of right-of-way.
ARTICLE III
PROCUREMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS
SEC. 8. Procurement by Electronic Means. – To promote transparency and
efficiency, information and communications technology shall be utilized in the conduct of
procurement procedures. Accordingly, there shall be a single portal that shall serve as the
primary source of information on all government procurement. The G-EPS shall serve as the
primary and definitive source of information on government procurement. Further, the
GPPB is authorized to approve changes in the procurement process to adapt to
improvements in modern technology, provided that such modifications are consistent with
the provisions of Section 3 of this Act.
To take advantage of the significant built-in efficiencies of the G-EPS and the volume
discounts inherent in bulk purchasing, all Procuring Entities shall utilize the G-EPS for the
procurement of common supplies in accordance with the rules and procedures to be
established by the GPPB. With regard to the procurement of non-common use items,
infrastructure projects and consulting services, agencies may hire service providers to
undertake their electronic procurement provided these service providers meet the minimum
requirements set by the GPPB.
SEC. 9. Security, Integrity and Confidentiality. – The G-EPS shall ensure the
security, integrity and confidentiality of documents submitted through the system. It shall
include a feature that provides for an audit trail for on-line transactions and allow the
Commission on Audit to verify the security and integrity of the systems at any time.
Republic Act No. 9184
6
ARTICLE IV
COMPETITIVE BIDDING
SEC. 10. Competitive Bidding. – All Procurement shall be done through
Competitive Bidding, except as provided for in Article XVI of this Act.
ARTICLE V
BIDS AND AWARDS COMMITTEE
SEC. 11. The BAC and its Composition. – Each procuring entity shall establish a
single BAC for its procurement. The BAC shall have at least five (5) members, but not more
than seven (7) members. It shall be chaired by at least a third ranking permanent official of
the procuring entity other than its head, and its composition shall be specified in the IRR.
Alternatively, as may be deemed fit by the head of the procuring entity, there may be
separate BACs where the number and complexity of the items to be procured shall so
warrant. Similar BACs for decentralized and lower level offices may be formed when
deemed necessary by the head of the procuring entity. The members of the BAC shall be
designated by the Head of Procuring Entity. However, in no case shall the approving
authority be a member of the BAC.
Unless sooner removed for a cause, the members of the BAC shall have a fixed term
of one (1) year reckoned from the date of appointment, renewable at the discretion of the
Head of the Procuring Entity. In case of resignation, retirement, separation, transfer, reassignment, removal, the replacement shall serve only for the unexpired term: Provided,
That in case of leave or suspension, the replacement shall serve only for the duration of the
leave or suspension. For justifiable causes, a member shall be suspended or removed by
the Head of the Procuring Entity.
SEC. 12. Functions of the BAC. – The BAC shall have the following functions:
advertise and/or post the invitation to bid, conduct pre-procurement and pre-bid
conferences, determine the eligibility of prospective bidders, receive bids, conduct the
evaluation of bids, undertake post-qualification proceedings, recommend award of contracts
to the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative: Provided, That in
the event the Head of the Procuring Entity shall disapprove such recommendation, such
disapproval shall be based only on valid, reasonable and justifiable grounds to be expressed
in writing, copy furnished the BAC; recommend the imposition of sanctions in accordance
with Article XXIII, and perform such other related functions as may be necessary, including
the creation of a Technical Working Group from a pool of technical, financial and/or legal
experts to assist in the procurement process.
In proper cases, the BAC shall also recommend to the Head of the Procuring Entity
the use of Alternative Methods of Procurement as provided for in Article XVI hereof.
The BAC shall be responsible for ensuring that the Procuring Entity abides by the
standards set forth by this Act and the IRR, and it shall prepare a procurement monitoring
report that shall be approved and submitted by the Head of the Procuring Entity to the GPPB
on a semestral basis. The contents and coverage of this report shall be provided in the IRR.
SEC. 13. Observers. – To enhance the transparency of the process, the BAC shall,
in all stages of the procurement process, invite, in addition to the representative of the
Republic Act No. 9184
7
Commission on Audit, at least two (2) observers to sit in its proceedings, one (1) from a duly
recognized private group in a sector or discipline relevant to the procurement at hand, and
the other from a non-government organization: Provided, however, That they do not have
any direct or indirect interest in the contract to be bid out. The observers should be duly
registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and should meet the criteria for
observers as set forth in the IRR.
SEC. 14. BAC Secretariat. – To assist the BAC in the conduct of its functions, the
Head of the Procuring Entity shall create a Secretariat that will serve as the main support
unit of the BAC. The Head of the Procuring Entity may also designate an existing organic
office within the agency to serve as the Secretariat.
SEC. 15. Honoraria of BAC Members. – The Procuring Entity may grant payment
of honoraria to the BAC members in an amount not to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
their respective basic monthly salary subject to availability of funds. For this purpose, the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) shall promulgate the necessary guidelines.
SEC. 16. Professionalization of BAC, BAC Secretariat and Technical
Working Group Members. – The GPPB shall establish a sustained training program for
developing the capacity of the BACs, BAC Secretariats and Technical Working Groups of
Procuring Entities, and professionalize the same.
ARTICLE VI
PREPARATION OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS
SEC. 17. Form and Contents of Bidding Documents. – The Bidding Documents
shall be prepared by the Procuring Entity following the standard forms and manuals
prescribed by the GPPB. The Bidding Documents shall include the following:
(a) Approved Budget for the Contract;
(b) Instructions to Bidders, including criteria for eligibility, bid evaluation and postqualification, as well as the date, time and place of the pre-bid Conference (where
applicable), submission of bids and opening of bids;
(c) Terms of Reference;
(d) Eligibility Requirements;
(e) Plans and Technical Specifications;
(f) Form of Bid, Price Form, and List of Goods or Bill of Quantities;
(g) Delivery Time or Completion Schedule;
(h) Form and Amount of Bid Security;
(i) Form and Amount of Performance Security and Warranty; and,
(j) Form of Contract, and General and Special Conditions of Contract.
Republic Act No. 9184
8
The Procuring Entity may require additional document requirements or specifications
necessary to complete the information required for the bidders to prepare and submit their
respective bids.
SEC. 18. Reference to Brand Names. – Specifications for the Procurement of
Goods shall be based on relevant characteristics and/or performance requirements.
Reference to brand names shall not be allowed.
SEC. 19. Access to Information. – In all stages of the preparation of the Bidding
Documents, the Procuring Entity shall ensure equal access to information. Prior to their
official release, no aspect of the Bidding Documents shall be divulged or released to any
prospective bidder or person having direct or indirect interest in the project to be procured.
ARTICLE VII
INVITATION TO BID
SEC. 20. Pre-Procurement Conference. – Prior to the issuance of the Invitation
to Bid, the BAC is mandated to hold a pre-procurement conference on each and every
procurement, except those contracts below a certain level or amount specified in the IRR, in
which case, the holding of the same is optional.
The pre-procurement conference shall assess the readiness of the procurement in
terms of confirming the certification of availability of funds, as well as reviewing all relevant
documents in relation to their adherence to law. This shall be attended by the BAC, the unit
or officials who prepared the bidding documents and the draft Invitation to Bid, as well as
consultants hired by the agency concerned and the representative of the end-user.
SEC. 21. Advertising and Contents of the Invitation to Bid. – In line with the
principle of transparency and competitiveness, all Invitations to Bid for contracts under
competitive bidding shall be advertised by the Procuring Entity in such manner and for such
length of time as may be necessary under the circumstances, in order to ensure the widest
possible dissemination thereof, such as, but not limited to, posting in the Procuring Entity’s
premises, in newspapers of general circulation, the G-EPS and the website of the Procuring
Entity, if available. The details and mechanics of implementation shall be provided in the
IRR to be promulgated under this Act.
The Invitation to Bid shall contain, among others:
(a) A brief description of the subject matter of the Procurement;
(b) A general statement on the criteria to be used by the Procuring Entity for the
eligibility check, the short listing of prospective bidders, in the case of the Procurement of
Consulting Services, the examination and evaluation of Bids, and post-qualification;
(c) The date, time and place of the deadline for the submission and receipt of the
eligibility requirements, the pre-bid conference if any, the submission and receipt of bids,
and the opening of bids;
(d) The Approved Budget for the Contract to be bid;
(e) The source of funds;
Republic Act No. 9184
9
(f) The period of availability of the Bidding Documents, and the place where these
may be secured;
(g) The contract duration; and,
(h) Such other necessary information deemed relevant by the Procuring Entity.
SEC. 22. Pre-bid Conference. – At least one pre-bid conference shall be
conducted for each procurement, unless otherwise provided in the IRR. Subject to the
approval of the BAC, a pre-bid conference may also be conducted upon the written request
of any prospective bidder.
The pre-bid conference(s) shall be held within a reasonable period before the
deadline for receipt of bids to allow prospective bidders to adequately prepare their bids,
which shall be specified in the IRR.
ARTICLE VIII
RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS
SEC. 23. Eligibility Requirements for the Procurement of Goods and
Infrastructure Projects. – The BAC or, under special circumstances specified in the IRR,
its duly designated organic office shall determine the eligibility of prospective bidders for the
procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects, based on the bidders’ compliance with
the eligibility requirements within the period set forth in the Invitation to Bid. The eligibility
requirements shall provide for fair and equal access to all prospective bidders. The
documents submitted in satisfaction of the eligibility requirements shall be made under oath
by the prospective bidder or by his duly authorized representative certifying to the
correctness of the statements made and the completeness and authenticity of the
documents submitted.
A prospective bidder may be allowed to submit his eligibility requirements
electronically. However, said bidder shall later on certify under oath as to correctness of the
statements made and the completeness and authenticity of the documents submitted.
SEC. 24. Eligibility Requirements and Short Listing for Consulting Services.
– The eligibility of prospective bidders for the Procurement of Consulting Services shall be
determined by their compliance with the eligibility requirements prescribed for the
Competitive Bidding concerned, within the period stated in the Invitation to Bid. The
eligibility requirements shall provide for fair and equal access to all prospective bidders. The
prospective bidder shall certify under oath as to the correctness of the statements made,
and the completeness and authenticity of the documents submitted.
A prospective bidder may be allowed to submit his eligibility requirements
electronically. However, said bidder shall later on certify under oath as to correctness of the
statements made and the completeness and authenticity of the documents submitted.
The eligible prospective bidders shall then be evaluated using numerical ratings on
the basis of the short listing requirements prescribed for the Competitive Bidding concerned,
within the period stated in the Invitation to Bid to determine the short list of bidders who
shall be allowed to submit their respective bids.
Republic Act No. 9184
10
SEC. 25. Submission and Receipt of Bids. – A bid shall have two (2)
components, namely the technical and financial components which should be in separate
sealed envelopes, and which shall be submitted simultaneously. The bids shall be received
by the BAC on such date, time and place specified in the invitation to bid. The deadline for
the receipt of bids shall be fixed by the BAC, giving it sufficient time to complete the bidding
process and giving the prospective bidders sufficient time to study and prepare their bids.
The deadline shall also consider the urgency of the procurement involved.
Bids submitted after the deadline shall not be accepted.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section and Section 26 of this Act, the GPPB
may prescribe innovative procedures for the submission, receipt and opening of bids
through the G-EPS.
SEC. 26. Modification and Withdrawal of Bids. – A bidder may modify his bid,
provided that this is done before the deadline for the receipt of bids. The modification shall
be submitted in a sealed envelope duly identified as a modification of the original bid and
stamped received by the BAC.
A bidder may, through a letter, withdraw his bid or express his intention not to
participate in the bidding before the deadline for the receipt of bids. In such case, he shall
no longer be allowed to submit another Bid for the same contract either directly or
indirectly.
SEC. 27. Bid Security. – All Bids shall be accompanied by a Bid security, which
shall serve as a guarantee that, after receipt of the Notice of Award, the winning bidder shall
enter into contract with the Procuring Entity within the stipulated time and furnish the
required performance security. The specific amounts and allowable forms of the Bid security
shall be prescribed in the IRR.
SEC. 28. Bid Validity. – Bids and Bid securities shall be valid for such reasonable
period of time indicated in the Bidding Documents. The duration for each undertaking shall
take into account the time involved in the process of Bid evaluation and award of contract.
SEC. 29. Bid Opening. – The BAC shall publicly open all bids at the time, date, and
place specified in the bidding documents. The minutes of the bid opening shall be made
available to the public upon written request and payment of a specified fee.
ARTICLE IX
BID EVALUATION
SEC. 30. Preliminary Examination of Bids. – Prior to Bid evaluation, the BAC
shall examine first the technical components of the bids using "pass/fail" criteria to
determine whether all required documents are present. Only bids that are determined to
contain all the bid requirements of the technical component shall be considered for opening
and evaluation of their financial component.
SEC. 31. Ceiling for Bid Prices. – The ABC shall be the upper limit or ceiling for
the Bid prices. Bid prices that exceed this ceiling shall be disqualified outright from further
participating in the bidding. There shall be no lower limit to the amount of the award.
Republic Act No. 9184
11
SEC. 32. Bid for the Procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects. –
For the procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects, the BAC shall evaluate the
financial component of the bids. The bids that passed the preliminary examination shall be
ranked from lowest to highest in terms of their corresponding calculated prices. The bid
with the lowest calculated price shall be referred to as the "Lowest Calculated Bid."
SEC. 33. Bid Evaluation of Short Listed Bidders for Consulting Services. –
For the Procurement of Consulting Services, the Bids of the short listed bidders shall be
evaluated and ranked using numerical ratings in accordance with the evaluation criteria
stated in the Bidding Documents, which shall include factors such as, but not limited to,
experience, performance, quality of personnel, price and methodology. The Bids shall be
ranked from highest to lowest in terms of their corresponding calculated ratings. The Bid
with the highest calculated rating shall be the “Highest Rated Bid.” After approval by the
Head of the Procuring Entity of the Highest Rated Bid, the BAC shall invite the bidder
concerned for negotiation and/or clarification on the following items: financial proposal
submitted by the bidder, terms of reference, scope of services, methodology and work
program, personnel to be assigned to the job, services/facilities/data to be provided by the
Procuring Entity concerned, and provisions of the contract. When negotiations with the
first-in-rank bidder fails, the financial proposal of the second rank bidder shall be opened for
negotiations: Provided, That the amount indicated in the financial envelope shall be made
as the basis for negotiations and the total contract amount shall not exceed the amount
indicated in the envelope and the ABC. Whenever necessary, the same process shall be
repeated until the bid is awarded to the winning bidder.
ARTICLE X
POST-QUALIFICATION
SEC. 34. Objective and Process of Post-qualification. – Post-qualification is
the stage where the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid, in the case of Goods and
Infrastructure Projects, or the Highest Rated Bid, in the case of Consulting Services,
undergoes verification and validation whether he has passed all the requirements and
conditions as specified in the Bidding Documents.
If the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid passes all the
criteria for post-qualification, his Bid shall be considered the “Lowest Calculated Responsive
Bid,” in the case of Goods and Infrastructure or the “Highest Rated Responsive Bid,” in the
case of Consulting Services. However, if a bidder fails to meet any of the requirements or
conditions, he shall be “post-disqualified” and the BAC shall conduct the post-qualification on
the bidder with the second Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid. If the bidder with
the second Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid is post-disqualified, the same
procedure shall be repeated until the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated
Responsive Bid is finally determined.
In all cases, the contract shall be awarded only to the bidder with the Lowest
Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated Responsive Bid.
SEC. 35. Failure of Bidding. – There shall be a failure of bidding if:
(a) No bids are received;
Republic Act No. 9184
12
(b) No bid qualifies as the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated
Responsive Bid; or,
(c) Whenever the bidder with the highest rated/lowest calculated responsive bid
refuses, without justifiable cause to accept the award of contract, as the case may be.
Under any of the above instances, the contract shall be re-advertised and re-bid.
The BAC shall observe the same process and set the new periods according to the same
rules followed during the first bidding. After the second failed bidding, however, the BAC
may resort to negotiated procurement as provided for in Section 53 of this Act.
SEC. 36. Single Calculated/Rated and Responsive Bid Submission. – A
single calculated/rated and responsive bid shall be considered for award if it falls under any
of the following circumstances:
(a) If after advertisement, only one prospective bidder submits a Letter of Intent
and/or applies for eligibility check, and meets the eligibility requirements or criteria, after
which it submits a bid, which is found to be responsive to the bidding requirements;
(b) If after the advertisement, more than one prospective bidder applies for
eligibility check, but only one bidder meets the eligibility requirements or criteria, after which
it submits a bid which is found to be responsive to the bidding requirements; or
(c) If after the eligibility check, more than one bidder meets the eligibility
requirements, but only one bidder submits a bid, and its bid is found to be responsive to the
bidding requirements.
In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the ABC reflects the most
advantageous prevailing price for the Government.
ARTICLE XI
AWARD, IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION OF THE CONTRACT
SEC. 37. Notice and Execution of Award. – Within a period not exceeding
fifteen (15) calendar days from the determination and declaration by the BAC of the Lowest
Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated Responsive Bid, and the recommendation of the
award, the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative shall approve
or disapprove the said recommendation. In case of approval, the Head of the Procuring
Entity or his duly authorized representative shall immediately issue the Notice of Award to
the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated Responsive Bid.
Within ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the Notice of Award, the winning
bidder shall formally enter into contract with the Procuring Entity. When further approval of
higher authority is required, the approving authority for the contract shall be given a
maximum of twenty (20) calendar days to approve or disapprove it.
In the case of government-owned and/or -controlled corporations, the concerned
board shall take action on the said recommendation within thirty (30) calendar days from
receipt thereof.
Republic Act No. 9184
13
The Procuring Entity shall issue the Notice to Proceed to the winning bidder not later
than seven (7) calendar days from the date of approval of the contract by the appropriate
authority. All notices called for by the terms of the contract shall be effective only at the
time of receipt thereof by the contractor.
SEC. 38. Period of Action on Procurement Activities. – The procurement
process from the opening of bids up to the award of contract shall not exceed three (3)
months, or a shorter period to be determined by the procuring entity concerned. Without
prejudice to the provisions of the preceding section, the different procurement activities
shall be completed within reasonable periods to be specified in the IRR.
If no action on the contract is taken by the head of the procuring entity, or by his
duly authorized representative, or by the concerned board, in the case of governmentowned and/or -controlled corporations, within the periods specified in the preceding
paragraph, the contract concerned shall be deemed approved.
SEC. 39. Performance Security. – Prior to the signing of the contract, the
winning bidder shall, as a measure of guarantee for the faithful performance of and
compliance with his obligations under the contract prepared in accordance with the Bidding
Documents, be required to post a performance security in such form and amount as
specified in the Bidding Documents.
SEC. 40. Failure to Enter into Contract and Post Performance Security. – If,
for justifiable causes, the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated
Responsive Bid fails, refuses or is otherwise unable to enter into contract with the Procuring
Entity, or if the bidder fails to post the required performance security within the period
stipulated in the Bidding Documents, the BAC shall disqualify the said bidder and shall
undertake post-qualification for the next-ranked Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid.
This procedure shall be repeated until an award is made. However, if no award is possible,
the contract shall be subjected to a new bidding.
In the case of a failure to post the required performance security, the bid security
shall be forfeited without prejudice to the imposition of sanctions prescribed under Article
XXIII.
SEC. 41. Reservation Clause. – The Head of the Agency reserves the right to
reject any and all Bids, declare a failure of bidding, or not award the contract in the
following situations:
(a) If there is prima facie evidence of collusion between appropriate public officers
or employees of the Procuring Entity, or between the BAC and any of the bidders, or if the
collusion is between or among the bidders themselves, or between a bidder and a third
party, including any act which restricts, suppresses or nullifies or tends to restrict, suppress
or nullify competition;
(b) If the BAC is found to have failed in following the prescribed bidding
procedures; or
(c) For any justifiable and reasonable ground where the award of the contract will
not redound to the benefit of the government as defined in the IRR.
SEC. 42. Contract Implementation and Termination. – The rules and
guidelines for the implementation and termination of contracts awarded pursuant to the
Republic Act No. 9184
14
provisions of this Act shall be prescribed in the IRR. The rules and guidelines shall include
standard general and special conditions for contracts.
ARTICLE XII
DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN PROCUREMENT
SEC. 43. Procurement of Domestic and Foreign Goods. – Consistent with the
country’s obligations under international treaties or agreements, Goods may be obtained
from domestic or foreign sources and the procurement thereof shall be open to all eligible
suppliers, manufacturers and distributors. However, in the interest of availability, efficiency
and timely delivery of Goods, the Procuring Entity may give preference to the purchase of
domestically-produced and manufactured goods, supplies and materials that meet the
specified or desired quality.
ARTICLE XIII
BIDDING OF PROVINCIAL PROJECTS
SEC. 44. Bidding of Provincial Projects. – Priority programs and infrastructure
projects funded out of the annual General Appropriations Act which are intended for
implementation within the province shall be subject to the same public bidding and to the
procurement processes prescribed under this Act. For purposes of this Article, Engineering
District civil works projects, subject to consultation with the concerned Members of
Congress, are included and subsumed in the term “provincial projects” and shall be
governed by this Section and Section 45 hereof.
SEC. 45. Provincial Bidders. – Within five (5) years from the effectivity of this
Act, a contractor who participates in the bidding of provincial priority programs and
infrastructure projects, whose principal office is within the same province, and who submits
the lowest bid among the provincial bidders which is higher than the lowest bid made by a
contractor with principal office outside the said province shall be granted the privilege to
match the bid made by the latter: Provided, however, That the release of funds for said
projects shall be published in a local newspaper with the widest circulation and the website
of the DBM, the mechanisms of which shall be spelled-out in the IRR.
ARTICLE XIV
LEASE OF COMPUTERS, COMMUNICATIONS, INFORMATION AND
OTHER EQUIPMENT
SEC. 46. Lease Contracts. – Lease of construction and office equipment, including
computers, communication and information technology equipment are subject to the same
public bidding and to the processes prescribed under this Act.
Republic Act No. 9184
15
ARTICLE XV
DISCLOSURE OF RELATIONS
SEC. 47. Disclosure of Relations. – In addition to the proposed contents of the
Invitation to Bid as mentioned under Section 21 of this Act, all bidding documents shall be
accompanied by a sworn affidavit of the bidder that he or she or any officer of their
corporation is not related to the Head of the Procuring Entity by consanguinity or affinity up
to the third civil degree. Failure to comply with the aforementioned provision shall be a
ground for the automatic disqualification of the bid in consonance with Section 30 of this
Act.
ARTICLE XVI
ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT
SEC. 48. Alternative Methods. – Subject to the prior approval of the Head of the
Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative, and whenever justified by the
conditions provided in this Act, the Procuring Entity may, in order to promote economy and
efficiency, resort to any of the following alternative methods of Procurement:
(a) Limited Source Bidding, otherwise known as Selective Bidding – a method of
Procurement that involves direct invitation to bid by the Procuring Entity from a set of preselected suppliers or consultants with known experience and proven capability relative to the
requirements of a particular contract;
(b) Direct Contracting, otherwise known as Single Source Procurement – a method
of Procurement that does not require elaborate Bidding Documents because the supplier is
simply asked to submit a price quotation or a pro-forma invoice together with the conditions
of sale, which offer may be accepted immediately or after some negotiations;
(c) Repeat Order – a method of Procurement that involves a direct Procurement of
Goods from the previous winning bidder, whenever there is a need to replenish Goods
procured under a contract previously awarded through Competitive Bidding;
(d) Shopping – a method of Procurement whereby the Procuring Entity simply
requests for the submission of price quotations for readily available off-the-shelf Goods or
ordinary/regular equipment to be procured directly from suppliers of known qualification; or
(e) Negotiated Procurement – a method of Procurement that may be resorted
under the extraordinary circumstances provided for in Section 53 of this Act and other
instances that shall be specified in the IRR, whereby the Procuring Entity directly negotiates
a contract with a technically, legally and financially capable supplier, contractor or
consultant.
In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the most advantageous price
for the Government is obtained.
SEC. 49. Limited Source Bidding. – Limited Source Bidding may be resorted to
only in any of the following conditions:
Republic Act No. 9184
16
(a) Procurement of highly specialized types of Goods and Consulting Services
which are known to be obtainable only from a limited number of sources; or
(b) Procurement of major plant components where it is deemed advantageous to
limit the bidding to known eligible bidders in order to maintain an optimum and uniform
level of quality and performance of the plant as a whole.
SEC. 50. Direct Contracting. – Direct Contracting may be resorted to only in any
of the following conditions:
(a) Procurement of Goods of proprietary nature, which can be obtained only from
the proprietary source, i.e. when patents, trade secrets and copyrights prohibit others from
manufacturing the same item;
(b) When the Procurement of critical components from a specific manufacturer,
supplier or distributor is a condition precedent to hold a contractor to guarantee its project
performance, in accordance with the provisions of his contract; or,
(c) Those sold by an exclusive dealer or manufacturer, which does not have subdealers selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can be obtained at more
advantageous terms to the Government.
SEC. 51. Repeat Order. – When provided for in the Annual Procurement Plan,
Repeat Order may be allowed wherein the Procuring Entity directly procures Goods from the
previous winning bidder whenever there arises a need to replenish goods procured under a
contract previously awarded through Competitive Bidding, subject to post-qualification
process prescribed in the Bidding Documents and provided all the following conditions are
present:
(a) The unit price must be equal to or lower than that provided in the original
contract;
(b) The repeat order does not result in splitting of requisitions or purchase orders;
(c) Except in special circumstances defined in the IRR, the repeat order shall be
availed of only within six (6) months from the date of the Notice to Proceed arising from the
original contract; and,
(d) The repeat order shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the quantity of
each item of the original contract.
SEC. 52. Shopping. – Shopping may be resorted to under any of the following
instances:
(a) When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase:
Provided, however, That the amount shall not exceed Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000); or
(b) Procurement of ordinary or regular office supplies and equipment not available
in the Procurement Service involving an amount not exceeding Two Hundred Fifty Thousand
Pesos (P250,000): Provided, however, That the Procurement does not result in Splitting of
Contracts: Provided, further, That at least three (3) price quotations from bona fide
suppliers shall be obtained.
Republic Act No. 9184
17
The above amounts shall be subject to a periodic review by the GPPB. For this
purpose, the GPPB shall be authorized to increase or decrease the said amount in order to
reflect changes in economic conditions and for other justifiable reasons.
SEC. 53. Negotiated Procurement. – Negotiated Procurement shall be allowed
only in the following instances:
(a) In cases of two failed biddings, as provided in Section 35 hereof;
(b) In case of imminent danger to life or property during a state of calamity, or
when time is of the essence arising from natural or man-made calamities or other causes
where immediate action is necessary to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or to
restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other public utilities;
(c) Take-over of contracts, which have been rescinded or terminated for causes
provided for in the contract and existing laws, where immediate action is necessary to
prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or to restore vital public services,
infrastructure facilities and other public utilities;
(d) Where the subject contract is adjacent or contiguous to an on-going
infrastructure project, as defined in the IRR: Provided, however, That the original contract
is the result of a Competitive Bidding; the subject contract to be negotiated has similar or
related scopes of work; it is within the contracting capacity of the contractor; the contractor
uses the same prices or lower unit prices as in the original contract less mobilization cost;
the amount involved does not exceed the amount of the ongoing project; and, the
contractor has no negative slippage: Provided, further, That negotiations for the
procurement are commenced before the expiry of the original contract. Whenever
applicable, this principle shall also govern consultancy contracts, where the consultants have
unique experience and expertise to deliver the required service; or,
(e) Subject to the guidelines specified in the IRR, purchases of Goods from another
agency of the Government, such as the Procurement Service of the DBM, which is tasked
with a centralized procurement of commonly used Goods for the government in accordance
with Letters of Instruction No. 755 and Executive Order No. 359, series of 1989.
SEC. 54. Terms and Conditions for the use of Alternative Methods. – The
specific terms and conditions, including the limitations and restrictions, for the application of
each of the alternative methods mentioned in this Article shall be specified in the IRR.
ARTICLE XVII
PROTEST MECHANISM
SEC. 55. Protests on Decisions of the BAC. – Decisions of the BAC in all stages
of procurement may be protested to the head of the procuring entity and shall be in writing.
Decisions of the BAC may be protested by filing a verified position paper and paying a nonrefundable protest fee. The amount of the protest fee and the periods during which the
protests may be filed and resolved shall be specified in the IRR.
SEC. 56. Resolution of Protests. – The protests shall be resolved strictly on the
basis of records of the BAC. Up to a certain amount to be specified in the IRR, the decisions
of the Head of the Procuring Entity shall be final.
Republic Act No. 9184
18
SEC. 57. Non-interruption of the Bidding Process. – In no case shall any
protest taken from any decision treated in this Article stay or delay the bidding process.
Protests must first be resolved before any award is made.
SEC. 58. Report to Regular Courts; Certiorari. – Court action may be resorted
to only after the protests contemplated in this Article shall have been completed. Cases that
are filed in violation of the process specified in this Article shall be dismissed for lack of
jurisdiction. The regional trial court shall have jurisdiction over final decisions of the head of
the procuring entity. Court actions shall be governed by Rule 65 of the 1997 Rules of Civil
Procedure.
This provision is without prejudice to any law conferring on the Supreme Court the
sole jurisdiction to issue temporary restraining orders and injunctions relating to
Infrastructure Projects of Government.
ARTICLE XVIII
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
SEC. 59. Arbitration. – Any and all disputes arising from the implementation of a
contract covered by this Act shall be submitted to arbitration in the Philippines according to
the provisions of Republic Act No. 876, otherwise known as the "Arbitration Law": Provided,
however, That, disputes that are within the competence of the Construction Industry
Arbitration Commission to resolve shall be referred thereto. The process of arbitration shall
be incorporated as a provision in the contract that will be executed pursuant to the
provisions of this Act: Provided, That by mutual agreement, the parties may agree in
writing to resort to alternative modes of dispute resolution.
SEC. 60. Appeals. – The arbitral award and any decision rendered in accordance
with the foregoing Section shall be appealable by way of a petition for review to the Court of
Appeals. The petition shall raise pure questions of law and shall be governed by the Rules
of Court.
ARTICLE XIX
CONTRACT PRICES AND WARRANTIES
SEC. 61. Contract Prices. – For the given scope of work in the contract as
awarded, all bid prices shall be considered as fixed prices, and therefore not subject to price
escalation during contract implementation, except under extraordinary circumstances and
upon prior approval of the GPPB.
For purposes of this Section, “extraordinary circumstances” shall refer to events that
may be determined by the National Economic and Development Authority in accordance
with the Civil Code of the Philippines, and upon the recommendation of the procuring entity
concerned.
SEC. 62. Warranty. – (a) For the procurement of Goods, in order to assure that
manufacturing defects shall be corrected by the supplier, manufacturer, or distributor, as the
case may be, for a specific time after performance of the contract, a warranty shall be
Republic Act No. 9184
19
required from the contract awardee for such period of time as may be provided in the IRR,
the obligation for which shall be covered by either retention money in the amount equivalent
to a percentage of every progress payment, or a special bank guarantee equivalent to a
percentage of the total contract price, to be provided in the IRR. The said amounts shall
only be released after the lapse of the warranty period, provided that the Goods supplied
are free from defects and all the conditions imposed under the contract have been fully met.
(b) For the procurement of infrastructure projects, the contractor shall assume full
responsibility for the contract work from the time project construction commenced up to a
reasonable period as defined in the IRR taking into consideration the scale and coverage of
the project from its final acceptance by the government and shall be held responsible for
any damage or construction of works except those occasioned by force majeure. The
contractor shall be fully responsible for the safety, protection, security, and convenience of
his personnel, third parties, and the public at large, as well as the works, equipment,
installation and the like to be affected by his construction work and shall be required to put
up a warranty security in the form of cash, bank guarantee, letter of credit, Government
Service Insurance System bond, or callable surety bond.
The contractor shall undertake the repair works, at his own expense, of any defect or
damage to the infrastructure projects on account of the use of materials of inferior quality
within ninety (90) days from the time the Head of the Procuring Entity has issued an order
to undertake repair. In case of failure or refusal to comply with this mandate, the
government shall undertake such repair works and shall be entitled to full reimbursement of
expenses incurred therein upon demand.
Any contractor who fails to comply with the preceding paragraph shall suffer
perpetual disqualification from participating in any public bidding and his property or
properties shall be subject to attachment or garnishment proceedings to recover the costs.
All payables of government in his favor shall be offset to recover the costs.
ARTICLE XX
THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD
SEC. 63. Organization and Functions. – A Government Procurement Policy Board
(GPPB) is hereby established to: (a) protect national interest in all matters affecting public
Procurement, having due regard to the country’s regional and international obligations; (b)
formulate and amend, whenever necessary, the IRR and the corresponding standard forms
for Procurement; (c) ensure that Procuring Entities regularly conduct Procurement training
programs and prepare a Procurement operations manual for all offices and agencies of
government; and (d) conduct an annual review of the effectiveness of this Act and
recommend any amendments thereto, as may be necessary.
The GPPB shall convene within fifteen (15) days from the effectivity of this Act to
formulate the IRR and for other related purposes. The GPPB shall be supported by a
technical support office.
In addition to the powers granted under this Act, the GPPB shall absorb all the
powers, functions and responsibilities of the Procurement Policy Board created under
Executive Order No. 359, series of 1989. All affected functions of the Infrastructure
Committee of the National Economic and Development Authority Board are hereby
transferred to the GPPB.
Republic Act No. 9184
20
SEC. 64. Membership. – The GPPB shall be composed of the Secretary of the
Department of Budget and Management, as Chairman, the Director-General of the National
Economic and Development Authority, as Alternate Chairman, with the following as
Members; the Secretaries of the Departments of Public Works and Highways, Finance, Trade
and Industry, Health, National Defense, Education, Interior and Local Government, Science
and Technology, Transportation and Communications, and Energy, or their duly authorized
representatives and a representative from the private sector to be appointed by the
President upon the recommendation of the GPPB. The GPPB may invite a representative
from the Commission on Audit to serve as a resource person.
ARTICLE XXI
PENAL CLAUSE
SEC. 65. Offenses and Penalties. – (a) Without prejudice to the provisions of
Republic Act No. 3019, otherwise known as the “Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act” and
other penal laws, public officers who commit any of the following acts shall suffer the
penalty of imprisonment of not less than six (6) years and one (1) day, but not more than
fifteen (15) years:
(1) Open any sealed Bid including but not limited to Bids that may have been
submitted through the electronic system and any and all documents required to be sealed or
divulging their contents, prior to the appointed time for the public opening of Bids or other
documents.
(2) Delaying, without justifiable cause, the screening for eligibility, opening of bids,
evaluation and post evaluation of bids, and awarding of contracts beyond the prescribed
periods of action provided for in the IRR.
(3) Unduly influencing or exerting undue pressure on any member of the BAC or
any officer or employee of the procuring entity to take a particular action which favors, or
tends to favor a particular bidder.
(4) Splitting of contracts which exceed procedural purchase limits and competitive
bidding.
(5) When the head of the agency abuses the exercise of his power to reject any
and all bids as mentioned under Section 41 of this Act with manifest preference to any
bidder who is closely related to him in accordance with Section 47 of this Act.
When any of the foregoing acts is done in collusion with private individuals, the
private individuals shall likewise be liable for the offense.
In addition, the public officer involved shall also suffer the penalty of temporary
disqualification from public office, while the private individual shall be permanently
disqualified from transacting business with the Government.
(b) Private individuals who commit any of the following acts, including any public
officer, who conspires with them, shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not less than
six (6) years and one (1) day but not more than fifteen (15) years:
Republic Act No. 9184
21
(1) When two or more bidders agree and submit different Bids as if they were
bona fide, when they knew that one or more of them was so much higher than the other
that it could not be honestly accepted and that the contract will surely be awarded to the
pre-arranged lowest Bid.
(2) When a bidder maliciously submits different Bids through two or more persons,
corporations, partnerships or any other business entity in which he has interest to create the
appearance of competition that does not in fact exist so as to be adjudged as the winning
bidder.
(3) When two or more bidders enter into an agreement which call upon one to
refrain from bidding for Procurement contracts, or which call for withdrawal of Bids already
submitted, or which are otherwise intended to secure an undue advantage to any one of
them.
(4) When a bidder, by himself or in connivance with others, employ schemes which
tend to restrain the natural rivalry of the parties or operates to stifle or suppress competition
and thus produce a result disadvantageous to the public.
In addition, the persons involved shall also suffer the penalty of temporary or
perpetual disqualification from public office and be permanently disqualified from transacting
business with the Government.
(c) Private individuals who commit any of the following acts, and any public officer
conspiring with them, shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not less than six (6) years
and one (1) day but not more than fifteen (15) years:
(1) Submit eligibility requirements of whatever kind and nature that contain false
information or falsified documents calculated to influence the outcome of the eligibility
screening process or conceal such information in the eligibility requirements when the
information will lead to a declaration of ineligibility from participating in public bidding.
(2) Submit Bidding Documents of whatever kind and nature that contain false
information or falsified documents or conceal such information in the Bidding Documents, in
order to influence the outcome of the public bidding.
(3) Participate in a public bidding using the name of another or allow another to
use one’s name for the purpose of participating in a public bidding.
(4) Withdraw a Bid, after it shall have qualified as the Lowest Calculated
Bid/Highest Rated Bid, or refuse to accept an award, without just cause or for the purpose
of forcing the Procuring Entity to award the contract to another bidder. This shall include
the non-submission within the prescribed time, or delaying the submission of requirements
such as, but not limited to, performance security, preparatory to the final award of the
contract.
(d) When the bidder is a juridical entity, criminal liability and the accessory penalties
shall be imposed on its directors, officers or employees who actually commit any of the
foregoing acts.
SEC. 66. Jurisdiction. – Jurisdiction over the offenses defined under this Article
shall belong to the appropriate courts, according to laws existing at the time of the
commission of the offenses.
Republic Act No. 9184
22
ARTICLE XXII
CIVIL LIABILITY
SEC. 67. Civil Liability in Case of Conviction. – Without prejudice to
administrative sanctions that may be imposed in proper cases, a conviction under this Act or
Republic Act No. 3019 shall carry with it civil liability, which may either consist of restitution
for the damage done or the forfeiture in favor of the government of any unwarranted
benefit derived from the act or acts in question or both, at the discretion of the courts.
SEC. 68. Liquidated Damages. – All contracts executed in accordance with this
Act shall contain a provision on liquidated damages which shall be payable in case of breach
thereof. The amount thereof shall be specified in the IRR.
ARTICLE XXIII
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
SEC. 69. Imposition of Administrative Penalties. – (a) In addition to the
provisions of Articles XXI and XXII of this Act, the Head of the Procuring Entity, subject to
the authority delegated to the BAC, if any, shall impose on bidders or prospective bidders,
the administrative penalty of suspension for one (1) year for the first offense, and
suspension of two (2) years for the second offense from participating in the public bidding
process, for the following violations:
(1) Submission of eligibility requirements containing false information or falsified
documents.
(2) Submission of Bids that contain false information or falsified documents, or the
concealment of such information in the Bids in order to influence the outcome of eligibility
screening or any other stage of the public bidding.
(3) Allowing the use of one’s name, or using the name of another for purposes of
public bidding.
(4) Withdrawal of a Bid, or refusal to accept an award, or enter into contract with
the government without justifiable cause, after he had been adjudged as having submitted
the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated Responsive Bid.
(5) Refusal or failure to post the required performance security within the
prescribed time.
(6) Termination of the contract due to the default of the bidder.
Refusal to clarify or validate in writing its Bid during post-qualification within a period
of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the request for clarification.
Any documented unsolicited attempt by a bidder to unduly influence the outcome of
the bidding in his favor.
Republic Act No. 9184
23
All other acts that tend to defeat the purpose of the Competitive Bidding.
(b) In addition to the penalty of suspension, the Bid security or the performance
security posted by the concerned bidder or prospective bidder shall also be forfeited.
(c) The Head of the Procuring Entity may delegate to the BAC the authority to
impose the aforementioned administrative penalties.
SEC. 70. Preventive Suspension. – The head of the procuring entity may
preventively suspend any member of the Technical Working Group or the Secretariat, or the
BAC if there are strong reasons or prima facie evidence showing that the officials or
employees concerned are guilty of the charges filed against them under Articles XXI and
XXII of this Act or for dishonesty as defined by the Civil Service Laws. In all cases,
procedural and substantive due process as mandated by the Constitution and Civil Service
Laws, rules and regulations, shall be strictly observed.
SEC. 71. Lifting of Suspension and Removal of Administrative Disabilities.
– Lifting of preventive suspension pending administrative investigation, as well as removal
of administrative penalties and disabilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 52 and 53, Chapter 6 (Civil Service Commission), Book V of Executive Order No.
292, the Administrative Code of 1987.
ARTICLE XXIV
LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF BAC MEMBERS
SEC. 72. Private Legal Assistance. – All the members of the BAC are hereby
authorized to engage the services of private lawyers or extend counsel immediately upon
receipt of Court Notice that a civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding is filed against them.
The lawyer's fee shall be part of the indemnification package for the BAC members, subject
to the provisions of Section 73 hereof.
SEC. 73. Indemnification of BAC Members. – The GPPB shall establish an
equitable indemnification package for public officials providing services in the BAC, which
may be in the form of free legal assistance, liability insurance, and other forms of protection
and indemnification for all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by such persons in
connection with any civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding to which they may be, or
have been made, a party by reason of the performance of their functions or duties, unless
they are finally adjudged in such action or proceeding to be liable for gross negligence or
misconduct or grave abuse of discretion.
In the event of a settlement or compromise, indemnification shall be confined only
on matters covered by the settlement, as to which the Procuring Entity had been advised by
counsel that the public officials to be indemnified have not committed gross negligence or
misconduct in the performance of their functions and duties.
The members of the BAC and the BAC Secretariat shall also be entitled to medical
assistance for injuries incurred in the performance of their functions.
Republic Act No. 9184
24
ARTICLE XXV
FINAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 74. Oversight Committee. – There is hereby created a Joint Congressional
Oversight Committee to oversee the implementation of this Act for a period not exceeding
five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act. The Committee shall be composed of the
Chairman of the Senate Committee on Constitutional Amendments and Revision of Laws and
two members thereof appointed by the Senate President, and the Chairman of the House
Committee on Appropriations, and two members thereof to be appointed by the Speaker of
the House of Representatives.
SEC. 75. Implementing Rules and Regulations and Standard Forms. –
Within sixty (60) days from the promulgation of this Act, the necessary rules and regulations
for the proper implementation of its provisions shall be formulated by the GPPB, jointly with
the members of the Oversight Committee created under Section 74 hereof. The said rules
and regulations shall be approved by the President of the Philippines. For a period not later
than thirty (30) days upon the approval of the implementing rules and regulations, the
standard forms for Procurement shall be formulated and approved.
SEC. 76. Repealing Clause. – This law repeals Executive Order No. 40, series of
2001, entitled “Consolidating Procurement Rules and Procedures for All National Government
Agencies, Government-Owned-or-Controlled Corporations and/or Government Financial
Institutions, and Requiring the Use of the Government Electronic Procurement System”;
Executive Order No. 262, Series of 2000, entitled "Amending Executive Order No. 302, series
of 1996, entitled "Providing Polices, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations for the Procurement
of Goods/Supplies by the National Government" and Section 3 of Executive Order No. 201,
series of 2000, entitled "Providing Additional Policies and Guidelines in the Procurement of
Goods/Supplies by the National Government"; Executive Order No. 302, series of 1996,
entitled "Providing Policies, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations for the Procurement of
Goods/Supplies by the National Government" and Presidential Decree No. 1594 dated June
11, 1978, entitled 'Prescribing Policies, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations for Government
Infrastructure Contracts." This law amends Title Six, Book Two of Republic Act No. 7160,
otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991"; the relevant provisions of
Executive Order No. 164, Series of 1987, entitled "Providing Additional Guidelines in the
Processing and Approval of Contracts of the National Government"; and the relevant
provisions of Republic Act No. 7898 dated February 23, 1995, entitled “An Act Providing for
the Modernization of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and for Other Purposes.” Any
other law, presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction,
administrative order, proclamation, charter, rule or regulation and/or parts thereof contrary
to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed, modified or amended
accordingly.
SEC. 77. Separability Clause. – If any provision of this Act is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
SEC. 78. Effectivity Clause. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following
its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD
Hon. Amenah F. Pangandaman
Chairperson, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Budget and Management
Hon. Arsenio M. Balisacan
Alternate Chairperson, GPPB
Secretary, National Economic and Development Authority
Hon. Sara Z. Duterte
Member, GPPB
Vice-President and Secretary, Department of Education
Hon. Raphael M. Lotilla
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Energy
Hon. Benjamin E. Diokno
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Finance
Hon. Maria Rosario S. Vergeire
Member, GPPB
Officer-in-Charge, Department of Health
Hon. Ivan John E. Uy
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Information and Communications Technology
Hon. Benjamin C. Abalos Jr.
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government
Hon. Jose C. Faustino Jr.
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of National Defense
Hon. Manuel M. Bonoan
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways
Hon. Renato U. Solidum, Jr.
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology
Hon. Alfredo E. Pascual
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry
Hon. Jaime J. Bautista
Member, GPPB
Secretary, Department of Transportation
Hon. Joel Joseph S. Marciano Jr.
Member, GPPB
Director-General, Philippine Space Agency
Dr. Fiorello R. Estuar
Member, GPPB
Private Sector Representative
Table of Contents
THE UPDATED 2016 REVISED IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9184
RULE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS.......................................................................10
Section 1. Short Title and Purpose.................................................................................... 10
Section 2. Declaration of Policy ........................................................................................ 10
Section 3. Governing Principles on Government Procurement............................................. 10
Section 4. Scope and Application of the IRR...................................................................... 11
Section 5. Definition of Terms .......................................................................................... 12
Section 6. Standardization of Procurement Process and Forms ........................................... 15
RULE II – PROCUREMENT PLANNING ...............................................................16
Section 7. Procurement Planning and Budgeting Linkage ................................................... 16
RULE III – PROCUREMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS.........................................19
Section 8. Procurement by Electronic Means and the Philippine Government Electronic
Procurement System (PhilGEPS)....................................................................................... 20
Section 9. Security, Integrity and Confidentiality................................................................ 27
RULE IV – COMPETITIVE BIDDING ...................................................................28
Section 10. Competitive Bidding ....................................................................................... 28
RULE V – BIDS AND AWARDS COMMITTEE .......................................................28
Section 11. The BAC and its Composition.......................................................................... 28
Section 12. Functions of the BAC...................................................................................... 30
Section 13. Observers...................................................................................................... 32
Section 14. BAC Secretariat / Procurement Unit................................................................. 33
Section 15. Honoraria of BAC, BAC Secretariat, and TWG Members .................................... 34
Section 16. Professionalization of BAC, TWG Members and Procurement Units .................... 34
RULE VI - PREPARATION OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS.........................................34
Section 17. Form and Contents of Bidding Documents ....................................................... 34
Section 18. Reference to Brand Names ............................................................................. 36
Section 19. Access to Information .................................................................................... 36
RULE VII – INVITATION TO BID........................................................................37
Section 20. Pre-procurement Conference .......................................................................... 37
Section 21. Advertising and Contents of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of
Interest.................................................................................................................38
Section 22. Pre-bid Conference ........................................................................................ 39
RULE VIII – RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS ..................................................41
Section 23. Eligibility Requirements for the Procurement of Goods and Infrastructure
Projects.................................................................................................................41
Section 24. Eligibility Requirements and Short Listing for Consulting Services ...................... 63
Section 25. Submission and Receipt of Bids....................................................................... 67
Section 26. Modification and Withdrawal of Bids................................................................ 71
Section 27. Bid Security ................................................................................................... 71
Section 28. Bid Validity .................................................................................................... 73
Section 29. Bid Opening .................................................................................................. 73
RULE IX – BID EVALUATION..............................................................................73
Section 30. Preliminary Examination of Bids ...................................................................... 73
Section 31. Ceiling for Bid Prices ...................................................................................... 75
Section 32. Bid Evaluation for the Procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects........... 75
Section 33. Bid Evaluation of Short Listed Bidders for Consulting Services ........................... 77
RULE X – POST-QUALIFICATION.......................................................................80
Section 34. Objective and Process of Post-Qualification...................................................... 80
Section 35. Failure of Bidding........................................................................................... 83
Section 36. Single Calculated/Rated and Responsive Bid Submission................................... 84
RULE XI – AWARD, IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION OF THE
CONTRACT.........................................................................................................84
Section 37. Notice and Execution of Award ....................................................................... 84
Section 38. Period of Action on Procurement Activities....................................................... 87
Section 39. Performance Security ..................................................................................... 88
Section 40. Failure to Enter into Contract and Post Performance Security............................ 90
Section 41. Reservation Clause......................................................................................... 90
Section 42. Contract Implementation and Termination....................................................... 91
RULE XII – DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN PROCUREMENT......................................91
Section 43. Procurement of Domestic and Foreign Goods................................................... 91
RULE XIII – BIDDING OF PROVINCIAL PROJECTS............................................92
Section 44. Bidding of Provincial Projects .......................................................................... 92
Section 45. Provincial Bidders........................................................................................... 92
RULE XIV – LEASE OF COMPUTERS, COMMUNICATIONS, INFORMATION
AND OTHER EQUIPMENT...................................................................................93
Section 46. Lease Contracts ............................................................................................. 93
RULE XV – DISCLOSURE OF RELATIONS ...........................................................93
Section 47. Disclosure of Relations ................................................................................... 93
RULE XVI – ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT .................................95
Section 48. Alternative Methods ....................................................................................... 95
Section 49. Limited Source Bidding................................................................................... 95
Section 50. Direct Contracting.......................................................................................... 96
Section 51. Repeat Order................................................................................................. 96
Section 52. Shopping....................................................................................................... 97
Section 53. Negotiated Procurement................................................................................. 97
Section 54. Terms and Conditions for the use of Alternative Methods ............................... 101
RULE XVII – PROTEST MECHANISM ................................................................103
Section 55. Protests on Decisions of the BAC .................................................................. 103
Section 56. Resolution of Protests .................................................................................. 104
Section 57. Non-interruption of the Bidding Process......................................................... 104
Section 58. Resort to Regular Courts; Certiorari............................................................... 105
RULE XVIII – SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES .......................................................105
Section 59. Arbitration................................................................................................... 105
Section 60. Appeals....................................................................................................... 105
RULE XIX – CONTRACT PRICES AND WARRANTIES ........................................105
Section 61. Contract Prices ............................................................................................ 105
Section 62. Warranty..................................................................................................... 106
RULE XX – THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD......................110
Section 63. Organization and Functions .......................................................................... 110
Section 64. Membership ................................................................................................ 111
RULE XXI – PENAL CLAUSE..............................................................................111
Section 65. Offenses and Penalties................................................................................. 112
Section 66. Jurisdiction.................................................................................................. 113
RULE XXII – CIVIL LIABILITY .........................................................................114
Section 67. Civil Liability in Case of Conviction................................................................. 114
Section 68. Liquidated Damages .................................................................................... 114
RULE XXIII – ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS..................................................114
Section 69. Imposition of Administrative Penalties ........................................................... 114
Section 70. Preventive Suspension ................................................................................. 115
Section 71. Lifting of Suspension and Removal of Administrative Disabilities...................... 115
RULE XXIV – LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF BAC
MEMBERS ........................................................................................................115
Section 72. Private Legal Assistance ............................................................................... 115
Section 73. Indemnification of BAC Members .................................................................. 116
RULE XXV – FINAL PROVISIONS .....................................................................116
Section 74. Amendment ................................................................................................ 116
Section 75. Repealing Clause ......................................................................................... 116
Section 76. Separability Clause....................................................................................... 117
Section 77. Transitory Clause......................................................................................... 117
Section 78. Effectivity Clause ......................................................................................... 117
ANNEX “A”
DETAILED ENGINEERING FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS............................................................................................ 118
ANNEX “B”
GENERAL PRINCIPLES ON CONSULTING SERVICES............................ 122
ANNEX “C” .................................................................................................................
RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD
ALLOWED FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES.......... 127
ANNEX “D”
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
GOODS, SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS.................................................... 130
ANNEX “E”
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS.............................................................. 133
ANNEX “F”
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
CONSULTING SERVICES...................................................................... 142
ANNEX “G”
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
CONTRACTS FOR DESIGN AND BUILD INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS. 143
ANNEX “H”
CONSOLIDATED GUIDELINES FOR THE ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF
PROCUREMENT.................................................................................... 153
ANNEX “I”
GUIDELINES ON TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS ................................ 187
APPENDIX 1
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS BY ADMINISTRATION ........................................................ 194
APPENDIX 2
GPPB CIRCULAR 08-2015
PREPARATION OF THE ANNUAL PROCUREMENT PLAN (APP) ............. 198
APPENDIX 3
GUIDELINES FOR ELECTRONIC BIDDING (E-BIDDING)...................... 201
APPENDIX 4
GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES -
OFFICIAL MERCHANTS REGISTRY (GoP-OMR).................................... 214
APPENDIX 5
GPPB CIRCULAR 03-2015
PROCUREMENT MONITORING REPORT (PMR) FORMAT ..................... 219
APPENDIX 6
CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT FORMAT........................................... 221
APPENDIX 7
GUIDELINES ON THE GRANT OF HONORARIA TO GOVERNMENT
PERSONNEL INVOLVED IN GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT ................. 223
APPENDIX 8
GUIDELINES ON THE SALE OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS........................ 228
APPENDIX 9
GUIDELINES IN THE DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBLITY OF FOREIGN
SUPPLIERS, CONTRACTORS, AND CONSULTANTS TO PARTICIPATE IN
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT PROJECTS........................................... 230
APPENDIX 10
GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF BID SECURING DECLARATION.............. 235
GPPB CIRCULAR 06-2005
TIE-BREAKING METHOD...................................................................... 238
APPENDIX 12
GUIDELINES AMENDING THE PRE-SELECTION PROCEDURE IN THE
CONDUCT OF LIMITED SOURCE BIDDING UNDER GPPB RESOLUTION 05-
2011 .................................................................................................... 239
APPENDIX 13
GUIDELINES ON IMPLEMENTATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
UNDERTAKEN BY THE AFP CORPS OF ENGINEERS.............................. 242
APPENDIX 14
GUIDELINES ON NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION PARTICIPATION
IN PUBLIC PROCUREMENT.................................................................. 246
APPENDIX 15
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR CONTRACT PRICE ESCALATION............... 251
APPENDIX 16
GUIDELINES ON PROCUREMENTS INVOLVING FOREIGN-DENOMINATED
BIDS, CONTRACT PRICES AND PAYMENT USING LETTERS OF CREDIT273
APPENDIX 17
UNIFORM GUIDELINES FOR BLACKLISTING OF MANUFACTURERS,
SUPPLIERS, DISTRIBUTORS, CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS ..... 276
APPENDIX 18
GUIDELINES FOR LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF BIDS
AND AWARDS COMMITTEE (BAC) MEMBERS AND ITS SUPPORT STAFF
............................................................................................................ 289
APPENDIX 19
REVISED GUIDELINES ON RECOGNITION OF UMBRELLA ORGANIZATION
OF CONSULTANTS ............................................................................... 294
APPENDIX 20
GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT OF PRINTING SERVICES.......... 303
APPENDIX 21
GUIDELINES ON PROCUREMENT OF WATER, ELECTRICITY,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS ......... 311
APPENDIX 22
REVISED GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT OF PETROLEUM, OIL, AND
LUBRICANT PRODUCTS....................................................................... 315
APPENDIX 23
GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT OF SECURITY AND JANITORIAL
SERVICES ............................................................................................ 325
APPENDIX 24
REVISED GUIDELINES ON THE EXTENSION OF CONTRACTS FOR
GENERAL SUPPORT SERVICES ............................................................ 329
APPENDIX 25
GPPB CIRCULAR 02-2010
GUIDELINES ON COMPARISON OF BIDS SUBMITTED BY COOPERATIVES
............................................................................................................ 331
APPENDIX 26
GPPB CIRCULAR 10-2015
HONORARIA OF GPPB-TSO RECOGNIZED TRAINERS.......................... 332
APPENDIX 27
GUIDELINES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NEGATIVE LIST OF SURETY
AND/OR INSURANCE COMPANIES ...................................................... 333
APPENDIX 28
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES,
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS AND CONSULTING SERVICES TO BE
PROCURED AND PERFORMED OVERSEAS............................................ 338
APPENDIX 29
GUIDELINES AND CONDITIONS IN THE RECOGNITION OF GPPB
PROCUREMENT TRAININGS OR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
PURSUANT TO SECTION 16 OF REPUBLIC ACT (RA) NO. 9184 AND ITS
2016 REVISED IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS (IRR) AND
THE RECOGNITION OF THE EXISTING POOL OF PROCUREMENT
TRAINERS............................................................................................ 341
APPENDIX 30
GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF THE VIRTUAL STORE FOR THE
PROCUREMENT OF COMMON-USE SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT ............. 348
APPENDIX 31
GUIDELINES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF EARLY PROCUREMENT
ACTIVITIES (EPA) ............................................................................... 354
APPENDIX 32
GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT BY ALL
PROCURING ENTITIES ........................................................................ 362
APPENDIX 33
TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND GOOD GOVERNANCE IN THE
PROCUREMENT PROCESS.................................................................... 376
APPENDIX 34
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019
VACCINES AND ITS ANCILLARY SUPPLIES AND SERVICES OR OTHER
GOODS AND SERVICES AUTHORIZED UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11525
OR THE COVID-19 VACCINATION PROGRAM ACT OF 2021................380
APPENDIX 35
GUIDELINES ON THE CONDUCT OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ....389
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND
MANAGEMENTGOVERNMENT
PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD
TECHNICAL SUPPORT OFFICE
Unit 2504 Raffles Corporate Center, F. Ortigas Jr. Road, Ortigas
Center, Pasig CityTel. Nos. (02) 7-900-6741 to 44
www.gppb.gov.ph
ATTY. ROWENA CANDICE M. RUIZ
Executive Director V
ATTY. MARIA DIONESIA A. RIVERA-GUILLERMO
Officer-in-Charge, Deputy Executive Director IV
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT
PROCUREMENT SERVICE
RR Road, Cristobal Street,
Paco, Manila Tel. Nos. (02) 8-
563-9397; (02) 8-563-9395
 www.ps-philgeps.gov.ph
ATTY. DENNIS S. SANTIAGO
Executive Director V
PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT
ELECTRONICPROCUREMENT SYSTEM
5th Floor, Automobile Association of the Philippines
Tower (AAP Tower) - Offices, 683 Aurora Blvd, New
Manila, Quezon City
Tel. Nos. (02) 8-640-6906
www.philgeps.gov.ph
MS. ROSA MARIA CLEMENTE
Director IV
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
9
THE 2016 REVISED
IMPLEMENTING RULES
AND REGULATIONS
OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9184
(Updated as of 01 September 2022)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
10
THE 2016 REVISED IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 9184, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
REFORM ACT
(Updated as of 01 September 2022)
RULE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1. Short Title and Purpose
This Updated 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations,2 hereinafter called the IRR,
is promulgated pursuant to Section 75 of Republic Act No. (R.A.) 9184, otherwise
known as the “Government Procurement Reform Act,” for the purpose of prescribing the
necessary rules and regulations for the modernization, standardization, and regulation of the
procurement activities of the Government of the Philippines (GoP).(a)
Section 2. Declaration of Policy
The provisions of this IRR are in line with the commitment of the GoP to promote good
governance and its effort to adhere to the principles of transparency, accountability, equity,
efficiency, and economy in its procurement process. It is the policy of the GoP that
procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services shall be competitive
and transparent, and therefore shall undergo competitive bidding, except as provided in
Rule XVI of this IRR.(a)
Section 3. Governing Principles on Government Procurement
The procurement of the GoP shall be governed by these principles:
a) Transparency in the procurement process and in the implementation of procurement
contracts through wide dissemination of bid opportunities and participation of
pertinent non-government organizations.
b) Competitiveness by extending equal opportunity to enable private contracting parties
who are eligible and qualified to participate in competitive bidding.
c) Streamlined procurement process that will uniformly apply to all government
procurement. The procurement process shall be simple and made adaptable to
advances in modern technology in order to ensure an effective and efficient method.
d) System of accountability where both the public officials directly or indirectly involved
in the procurement process as well as in the implementation of procurement
contracts and the private parties that deal with GoP are, when warranted by
circumstances, investigated and held liable for their actions relative thereto.
e) Public monitoring of the procurement process and the implementation of awarded
contracts with the end in view of guaranteeing that these contracts are awarded
pursuant to the provisions of the Act and this IRR, and that all these contracts are
performed strictly according to specifications.
2 The 2016 revised IRR was approved by the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) through its Resolution 13-2016,
dated 9 August 2016, and published in the Official Gazette on 29 August 2016. It took effect sixty (60) days after its publication
or on 28 October 2016.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
11
Section 4. Scope and Application of the IRR
4.1 This IRR shall apply to all procurement of any branch, agency, department, bureau,
office, or instrumentality of the GoP, including government-owned and/or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs), government financial institutions (GFIs), state universities and
colleges (SUCs), and local government units (LGUs).
4.2 Any Treaty or International or Executive Agreement to which the GoP is a signatory
affecting the subject matter of the Act and this IRR shall be observed. In case of
conflict between the terms of the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement
and this IRR, the former shall prevail.
4.3 Unless the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement expressly provides
another or different procurement procedures and guidelines, R.A. 9184 and this IRR
shall apply to Foreign-funded Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects, and
Consulting Services by the GoP.
The GoP negotiating panels shall, as its default position, adhere to R.A. 9184 and this
IRR, or at the very least, selection through competitive bidding, in all Foreign-funded
Procurement. If the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement states otherwise,
then the negotiating panel shall ensure that the reasons for the adoption of a
different rule or method of procurement are clearly reflected in the records of
discussion.(a)
4.4 This IRR shall not apply to the following activities:
a) Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services funded
from Foreign Grants covered by R.A. 8182, as amended by R.A. 8555, entitled
“An Act Excluding Official Development Assistance (ODA) from the Foreign Debt
Limit in order to Facilitate the Absorption and Optimize the Utilization of ODA
Resources, Amending for the Purpose Paragraph 1, Section 2 of R.A. 4860, As
Amended,” unless the GoP and the foreign grantor/foreign or international
financing institution agree otherwise;
b) Acquisition of real property which shall be governed by R.A. 107523
, entitled “An
Act Facilitating the Acquisition of Right-Of-Way Site or Location for National
Government Infrastructure Projects,” and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations; and
c) Public-Private sector infrastructure or development projects and other
procurement covered by R.A. 6957, as amended by R.A. 7718, entitled “An Act
Authorizing the Financing, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of
Infrastructure Projects by the Private Sector, and for Other Purposes,” as
amended: Provided, however, That for the portions financed by the GoP, in
whole or in part, the provisions of the Act and this IRR shall apply.(a)
4.5 The following are not procurement activities under R.A. 9184 and this IRR:
a) Direct financial or material assistance given to beneficiaries in accordance with
the existing laws, rules and regulations, and subject to the guidelines of the
concerned agency;
3 Repealed R.A. No. 8974.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
12
b) Participation in local or foreign scholarships, trainings, continuing education,
conferences, seminars or similar activities that shall be governed by applicable
COA, CSC, and DBM rules;
c) Lease of government-owned property as lessor for private use;
d) Hiring of Job Order Workers;
e) Joint Venture under the revised NEDA Guidelines (GOCC and Private Entities),
and Joint Venture Agreements by LGU with Private entities; and
f) Disposal of Property and Other Assets of the Government. (n)
Section 5. Definition of Terms
For purposes of this IRR, the following terms or words and phrases shall mean or be
understood as follows:
a) Act. Refers to R.A. 9184, entitled “An Act Providing for the Modernization,
Standardization and Regulation of the Procurement Activities of the Government and
for other Purposes,” otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act.
b) Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC). Refers to the budget for the contract
duly approved by the HoPE, as provided for in the General Appropriations Act (GAA),
continuing, and automatic appropriations, in the case of national government
agencies (NGAs); the corporate budget for the contract approved by the governing
board, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O). No. 518, s. 1979, in the case of GOCCs
and GFIs, and R.A. 8292 in the case of SUCs; the budget approved by the
Sanggunian through an appropriations ordinance in the case of LGUs. For multi-year
contracts, for which a Multi-Year Obligational Authority (MYOA) or an equivalent
document is required, the ABC shall be that incorporated in the project cost reflected
in the MYOA or equivalent document.
For Foreign-funded Procurement, the ABC refers to the cost estimate prepared by
the Procuring Entity and approved by the foreign government/foreign or international
financing institution as specified in the Treaty or International or Executive
Agreement.(a)
c) Bid. Refers to a signed offer or proposal to undertake a contract submitted by a
bidder in response to and in consonance with the requirements of the Bidding
Documents. For purposes of, and throughout this IRR, the term “Bid” shall be
equivalent to and be used interchangeably with “Proposal” and “Tender.” (5.d)
d) Bidder. Refers to a contractor, manufacturer, supplier, distributor and/or consultant
who submits a bid in response to the requirements of the Bidding Documents. (5.ea)
e) Bidding Documents. Refer to the documents issued by the Procuring Entity as the
basis for bids, furnishing all information necessary for a prospective bidder to
prepare a bid for the Goods, Infrastructure Projects and/or Consulting Services
required by the Procuring Entity. (5.f)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
13
f) Bids and Awards Committee (BAC). Refers to the Committee established in
accordance with Rule V of this IRR. (5.c)
g) Common-Use Supplies and Equipment (CSE). Refer to those goods, materials
and equipment that are used in the day-to-day operations of Procuring Entities in the
performance of their functions. For the purpose of this IRR, CSE shall be those
included in the Electronic Catalogue of the PhilGEPS. (a)
h) Competitive Bidding. Refers to a method of procurement which is open to
participation by any interested party and which consists of the following processes:
advertisement, pre-bid conference, eligibility screening of prospective bidders,
receipt and opening of bids, evaluation of bids, post-qualification, and award of
contract. For purposes of, and throughout this IRR, the terms “Competitive Bidding”
and “Public Bidding” shall have the same meaning and shall be used interchangeably.
i) Consulting Services. Refer to services for infrastructure projects and other types
of projects or activities of the GoP requiring adequate external technical and
professional expertise that are beyond the capability and/or capacity of the GoP to
undertake such as, but not limited to: (i) advisory and review services; (ii) preinvestment or feasibility studies; (iii) design; (iv) construction supervision; (v)
management and related services; and (vi) other technical services or special
studies. General principles on Consulting Services are provided for in Annex “B” of
this IRR.
j) Domestic Bidder. Refers to any person or entity offering unmanufactured articles,
materials or supplies of the growth or production of the Philippines, or manufactured
articles, materials, or supplies manufactured or to be manufactured in the Philippines
substantially from articles, materials, or supplies of the growth, production, or
manufacture, as the case may be, of the Philippines.
k) Domestic Entity. Refers to an individual or a sole proprietor who is a citizen of the
Philippines or a partnership, corporation, cooperative, or association duly organized
under the laws of the Philippines and of which at least seventy five percent (75%) of
the interest or outstanding capital stock belongs to citizens of the Philippines,
habitually established in business and habitually engaged in the manufacture or sale
of the merchandise covered by his bid, and the business has been in existence for at
least five (5) consecutive years prior to the advertisement and/or posting of the
Invitation to Bid.4
l) Executive Agreements. Refer to International Agreements except that they do not
require legislative ratification.
m) Expendable Supplies. Refer to articles which are normally consumed in use within
one (1) year or converted in the process of manufacture or construction, or those
having a life expectancy of more than one (1) year but which shall have decreased
substantially in value after being put to use for only one (1) year (e.g., medicines,
stationery, fuel, and spare parts).
n) Foreign Bid. Refers to any offer of articles, materials or supplies not manufactured
or not to be manufactured in the Philippines, substantially from articles, materials, or
4
Preference to domestic entities, provided for under Commonwealth Act N o . 138, dated 7 November 1936, which has
beenexpressly repealed by R.A. No. 10667 or the “Philippine Competition Act of 2015” shall no longer be applied.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
14
supplies of the growth, production, or manufacture, as the case may be, of the
Philippines.
o) Foreign-funded Procurement. Refers to the acquisition of goods, consulting
services, and the contracting for infrastructure projects by the GoP which are wholly
or partly funded by Foreign Loans or Grants pursuant to a Treaty or International or
Executive Agreement. For purposes of, and throughout this IRR, the term “foreignfunded procurement” shall have the same meaning as and shall be used
interchangeably with “foreign-funded projects” or “foreign-assisted projects.”
p) Foreign Grants. Refer to grants with no repayment obligations and are provided in
monetary form, goods, works, and consultancy services, among others.
q) Foreign Loans. Refer to loans, credits, and indebtedness with private foreign banks
or with foreign governments, agencies, or instrumentalities of such foreign
governments, foreign financial institutions, or other international organizations with
whom, or belonging to countries with which, the Philippines has diplomatic relations,
as may be necessary and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, to
enable the GoP to finance, either directly or through any government office, agency
or instrumentality or any government-owned and controlled corporation, industrial,
agricultural or other economic development purposes or projects authorized by law.
r) Goods. Refer to all items, supplies, materials and general support services, except
Consulting Services and infrastructure projects, which may be needed in the
transaction of public businesses or in the pursuit of any government undertaking,
project or activity, whether in the nature of equipment, furniture, stationery,
materials for construction, or personal property of any kind, including non-personal
or contractual services, such as, the repair and maintenance of equipment and
furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous
services, as well as procurement of materials and supplies provided by the Procuring
Entity for such services. The term “related” or “analogous services” shall include, but
is not limited to, lease of office space, media advertisements, health maintenance
services, and other services essential to the operation of the Procuring Entity. (a)
s) Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB). Refers to the Body created in
accordance with Rule XX of this IRR.
t) Head of the Procuring Entity (HoPE). Refers to: (i) the head of the agency or
body, or his duly authorized official, for NGAs and the constitutional commissions or
offices, and other branches of government; (ii) the governing board or its duly
authorized official, for GOCCs, GFIs and SUCs; or (iii) the local chief executive, for
LGUs: Provided, however, That in an agency, department, or office where the
procurement is decentralized, the head of each decentralized unit shall be considered
as the HoPE, subject to the limitations and authority delegated by the head of the
agency, department, or office.(a)
u) Infrastructure Projects. Include the construction, improvement, rehabilitation,
demolition, repair, restoration or maintenance of roads and bridges, railways,
airports, seaports, communication facilities, civil works components of information
technology projects, irrigation, flood control and drainage, water supply, sanitation,
sewerage and solid waste management systems, shore protection, energy/power
and electrification facilities, national buildings, school buildings, hospital buildings,
and other related construction projects of the government. For purposes of, and
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
15
throughout this IRR, the term “Infrastructure Projects” shall have the same meaning
as, and shall be used interchangeably with, “civil works” or “works.”
v) International Agreement. Refers to a contract or understanding, regardless of
nomenclature, entered into between the GoP and another government or foreign or
international financing institution in written form and governed by international law,
whether embodied in a single instrument or in two (2) or more related instruments.
w) Non-expendable Supplies. Refer to articles which are not consumed in use and
ordinarily retain their original identity during the period of use, whose serviceable life
is more than one (1) year and which add to the assets of the GoP (e.g., furniture,
fixtures, transport and other equipment). For this IRR, the term non-expendable
supplies shall include semi-expendable property. (a)
x) Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS). Refers
to the electronic System as provided in Section 8 of this IRR. For purposes of, and
throughout this IRR, the term “PhilGEPS” shall have the same meaning as, and shall
be used interchangeably with, “G-EPS” referred to in the Act.
y) Philippine National. Refers to an individual or a sole proprietor who is a citizen of
the Philippines or a partnership, corporation, or association organized under the laws
of the Philippines of which at least sixty percent (60%) of the capital or interest is
owned by citizens of the Philippines, or cooperatives registered with the Cooperative
Development Authority.(a)
z) Portal. Refers to a website that integrates a wide variety of contents for the purpose
of attracting and aggregating multiple users together in a central virtual space.
aa) Procurement. Refers to the acquisition of goods, consulting services, and the
contracting for infrastructure projects by the Procuring Entity. In case of projects
involving mixed procurements, the nature of the procurement, i.e., Goods,
Infrastructure Projects or Consulting Services, shall be determined based on the
primary purpose of the contract. Procurement shall also include the lease of goods
and real estate. With respect to real property, its procurement shall be governed by
the provisions of R.A. 10752 and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. (a)
bb) Procuring Entity. Refers to any branch, constitutional commission or office,
agency, department, bureau, office, or instrumentality of the GoP (NGA), including
GOCC, GFI, SUC and LGU procuring goods, infrastructure projects and consulting
services.
cc) Treaties. Refer to international agreements entered into by the GoP which require
legislative ratification after executive concurrence.
dd) Universal or Commercial Banks. Refer to universal or commercial banks duly
authorized under R.A. 8791, otherwise known as “The General Banking Act of 2000.”
Section 6. Standardization of Procurement Process and Forms
6.1 To systematize the procurement process, avoid confusion and ensure transparency,
the GPPB shall pursue the development and approval of generic procurement
manuals, standard Bidding Documents, and forms, including those to be used for
major procurement like drugs and textbooks. (a)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
16
6.2 Procuring Entities are mandated to use the Generic Procurement Manuals (GPMs),
Philippine Bidding Documents (PBDs), and other standard forms issued by the GPPB.
However, whenever necessary, to suit the particular needs of the Procuring Entity,
modifications may be made, particularly for major and specialized procurement,
subject to the approval of the GPPB. (a)
RULE II – PROCUREMENT PLANNING
Section 7. Procurement Planning and Budgeting Linkage
7.1. All procurement shall be within the approved budget of the Procuring Entity and
should be meticulously and judiciously planned by the Procuring Entity. Consistent
with government fiscal discipline measures, only those considered crucial to the
efficient discharge of governmental functions shall be included in the Annual
Procurement Plan (APP). For purposes of this IRR, a procurement project shall be
considered crucial to the efficient discharge of governmental functions if it is required
for the day-to-day operations or is in pursuit of the principal mandate of the
Procuring Entity concerned. The APP shall include provisions for foreseeable
emergencies based on historical records. In the case of Infrastructure Projects, the
APP shall consider the appropriate timing/phasing of related project activities, such
as, engineering design and acquisition of right-of-way site or location, to
reduce/lower project costs. (a)
7.2. No procurement shall be undertaken unless it is in accordance with the approved
APP, including approved changes thereto. The APP must be consistent with the duly
approved yearly budget of the Procuring Entity and shall bear the approval of the
HoPE or second-ranking official designated by the HoPE to act on his behalf. (a)
7.3. The APP shall be formulated and revised only in accordance with the following
guidelines:
7.3.1. Upon issuance of the budget call in the case of NGAs, SUCs, Constitutional
Commissions or Offices, or similar document for GOCCs, GFIs and LGUs, the
Procuring Entity shall prepare its indicative APP for the succeeding calendar
year to support its proposed budget taking into consideration the budget
framework for that year in order to reflect its priorities and objectives.(a)
7.3.2. In the preparation of the indicative APP, the end-user or implementing units
of the Procuring Entity shall formulate their respective Project Procurement
Management Plans (PPMPs) for their different programs, activities, and
projects (PAPs). The PPMP shall include:
a) information on whether PAPs will be contracted out, implemented by
administration in accordance with the guidelines5
issued by the GPPB, or
consigned;
b) the type and objective of contract to be employed;
c) the extent/size of contract scopes/packages;
5 Refer to Appendix 1 for the Revised Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure Projects By Administration.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
17
d) the procurement methods to be adopted, and indicating if the
procurement tasks are to be outsourced as provided in Section 7.3.3 of
this IRR;
e) the time schedule for each procurement activity and for the contract
implementation; and
f) the estimated budget for the general components of the contract.
For purposes of this Section, consignment refers to an arrangement where
the following requisites are present: (a) delivery of goods by their owner
(consignor), without sale, to a government agency (consignee); (b) consignee
must try to sell the goods and remit the price of the sold goods to the
consignor; (c) consignee accepts without any liability except for failure to
reasonably protect them from damage; (d) no disbursement of government
funds is involved; and (e) at terms not disadvantageous to the GoP.
Based on the specific needs, the end-user or implementing units of the
Procuring Entity shall be responsible for the preparation of all documents
necessary for the procurement activity, including but shall not be limited to,
the technical specifications, scope of work, or terms of reference. (a)
7.3.3. In order to hasten project implementation, Procuring Entities which may not
have the proficiency or capability to undertake a particular procurement, as
determined by the HoPE concerned, may outsource the procurement tasks
by:
a) Requesting other GoP agencies to undertake such procurement for them,
through the execution of a memorandum of agreement containing specific
arrangements, stipulations and covenants, in accordance with
government budgeting, accounting and auditing rules;
As long as the procurement process was conducted in accordance with RA
9184, its IRR and associated issuances, recommendations to award a
contract made by the government procurement agent shall be accepted
by the requesting agency, subject to Section 41 of this IRR.6
(n)
b) Engaging private procurement agents to directly undertake the
procurement for them, subject to the guidelines to be issued by the
GPPB; or
c) Recruiting or engaging consultants to assist them directly and/or train
their staff in the management of the procurement function. (53.6a)
7.3.4. The PPMPs shall then be submitted to the Procuring Entity’s Budget Office for
evaluation in order to ensure consistency with the Procuring Entity's budget
proposal and compliance with existing budgeting rules. The PPMPs included in
the budget proposal shall be forwarded to the BAC Secretariat for
consolidation into an indicative APP, and to the BAC for final recommendation
6 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 21-2017, dated 30 May 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20 November
2017.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
18
of the appropriate procurement modality. For this purpose, the indicative APP
shall include the following:
a) Name of Procurement Project;
b) Procurement Management Office (PMO)/end-user/implementing unit;
c) Method of Procurement;
d) Schedule of identified procurement activities as reflected in the APP form
approved by the GPPB;7
e) Source of funds;
f) Indicative ABC; and
g) Other relevant descriptions of the project, if applicable.
The indicative APP and budget proposal shall be simultaneously submitted to
the HoPE and/or other oversight bodies for approval. (a)
7.3.5. As soon as the GAA, corporate budget, or appropriation ordinance, as the case
may be, becomes final, the end-user or implementing units shall revise and
adjust the PPMPs to reflect the budgetary allocation for their respective PAPs.
The revised PPMPs shall be submitted to the BAC, through its Secretariat, for
the final recommendation of the methods of procurement. The indicative APP
shall then be revised and approved in accordance with Section 7.2 of this IRR.
The APP shall be submitted to the GPPB on or before the end of January of
the budget year, and shall be posted in accordance with E.O. 662, series of
2007, as amended. (a)
7.4. Changes to the individual PPMPs and the consolidated APP may be undertaken every
six (6) months or as often as may be required by the HoPE. The respective end-user
or implementing units of the Procuring Entity shall be responsible for the changes to
the PPMPs, while the BAC Secretariat shall be responsible for the consolidation of
these PPMPs into an APP, which shall be subject to the approval of the HoPE.
Changes in the APP, if any, for the budget year shall be submitted to the GPPB in
July of the current budget year, and in January of the following budget year. (a)
7.5. Except for procurement projects undertaken through early procurement activities
(EPA), the ABC as reflected in the approved APP shall be at all times consistent with
the appropriations for the project authorized in the GAA, continuing, and automatic
appropriations, the corporate budget, and the appropriations ordinance, as the case
may be.8
(a)
For EPA, the posted ABC may be higher than the approved budget as long as the
contract price to be awarded is within the amount authorized in the GAA, reenacted
budget, appropriations ordinance, corporate budget, or loan agreement, as the case
may be.9
(n)
7 Refer to Appendix 2 for the Annual Procurement Plan (APP) format.
8 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 14-2019, dated 17 July 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
9
Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
19
(n)
7.6. To facilitate the immediate implementation of procurement of Goods, Infrastructure
Projects or Consulting Services, even pending approval of the GAA, corporate
budget, appropriations ordinance or loan agreements in the case of FAPs, as the
case may be, and notwithstanding Section 7.2 hereof, the Procuring Entity may
undertake EPA.10
(a)
Procuring Entities are encouraged to undertake EPA to ensure the timely delivery of
goods, implementation of infrastructure projects and rendition of consultancy
services. The conduct of EPA for nationally-funded procurement projects may
commence as early as the submission of the NEP to Congress, usually in July. No
EPA may be conducted without an indicative APP duly approved by the HoPE and the
MYCA issued by the DBM, in the case of multi-year projects. This will facilitate the
awarding of procurement contracts upon approval and effectivity of their respective
funding sources or the reenactment of the previous year’s budget which constitutes
the current year’s authorized budget, when authorized by the Constitution, law or
rules.11
(a)
For EPA, the indicative APP shall be based on the ABC in the proposed national
budget submitted by the President to Congress; for GOCCs, on budget levels as
proposed to the governing board; for LGUs, on budget levels as proposed in the
executive budget submitted to the Sanggunian; and for foreign-assisted projects
(FAPS), on the document issued by the foreign donor or financing institution
explicitly stating that a loan is to be made available to the Philippines or any of its
agencies or instrumentalities with borrowing authority. 12
No award of contract shall be made until the approval and effectivity of the GAA,
corporate budget, appropriations ordinance or the loan agreement in the case of
FAPs.13 (a)
Notwithstanding the approval and effectivity of the GAA, reenacted budget,
appropriations ordinance, corporate budget or loan agreement, Procuring Entities
shall not award contracts for procurement projects requiring Special Allotment
Release Order or Sub-Allotment Release Order until the same has been issued,
secured or released.
14 (n)
7.7. For procurement projects subject to Framework Agreement as provided in the
Guidelines on the use of Framework Agreement by all Procuring Entities, the enduser unit shall ensure that the Framework Agreement List must be attached to the
APP submitted to the BAC to be approved by the HoPE.15
(n)
RULE III – PROCUREMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 27-2019, dated 10 December 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
20
Section 8. Procurement by Electronic Means and the Philippine Government
Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS)
8.1. The PhilGEPS
8.1.1. To promote transparency and efficiency, information and communications
technology shall be utilized in the conduct of procurement procedures.
Accordingly, there shall be a single portal that shall serve as the primary
source of information on all government procurement. The PhilGEPS shall
serve as the primary and definitive source of information on government
procurement. For this purpose, the Electronic Procurement System (EPS)
established in accordance with E.O. 322, s. 2000, and E.O. 40, s. 2001, shall
continue to be managed by the DBM-PS under the supervision of the GPPB,
as the PhilGEPS, in accordance with this IRR.
8.1.2. To take advantage of the significant built-in efficiencies of the PhilGEPS and
the volume discounts inherent in bulk purchasing, all Procuring Entities shall
utilize the PhilGEPS for the procurement of Common-Use Supplies in
accordance with the rules and procedures to be established by the GPPB.
With regard to the procurement of non-common use items, Infrastructure
Projects, and Consulting Services, agencies may hire service providers
through competitive bidding to undertake their electronic procurement:
Provided, however, That these service providers meet the following minimum
requirements:
a) Comply with the provisions of the Act and this IRR, and R.A. 8792,
otherwise known as the “Electronic Commerce Act;”
b) Linked to the PhilGEPS, particularly with regard to the posting of all bid
opportunities and awards;
c) Allow parallel manual submission of bids to the Procuring Entity;
d) Ensure that the BAC shall have complete control of the bidding process,
and that the BAC’s sole authority to open bids is strictly observed;
e) Its system must be virus-resilient and must provide sufficient security
which is at least equivalent to that employed by the PhilGEPS, such as,
but not limited to, firewall and encryption devices;
f) Must provide for the use of electronic signatures and other current
electronic authentication devices;
g) Must have sufficient redundant back-up facilities;
h) Must have provisions for linkage to the Procuring Entity’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS), Logistics Management Systems,
and other internal information systems that may interact with the
procurement process; and
i) Electronic payment facilities, if used, shall comply with all laws, rules and
regulations issued by the Government.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
21
8.1.3. The GPPB shall determine and certify compliance with the above
requirements. However, the GPPB may delegate this task to technically
capable agencies/offices/units of the Government.
8.2. Features of the PhilGEPS
8.2.1. The Electronic Bulletin Board
a) The PhilGEPS shall have a centralized electronic bulletin board for posting
procurement opportunities, notices, awards and reasons for award. All
Procuring Entities are required to post all procurement opportunities,
results of bidding and related information in the PhilGEPS bulletin board.
b) Procuring Entities shall post the Invitation to Bid for Goods and
Infrastructure Projects or the Request for Expression of Interest for
Consulting Services, in the electronic bulletin board in accordance with
Section 21 of this IRR.
8.2.2. Registry of Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors and Consultants
a) The PhilGEPS shall have a centralized electronic database of all
manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants
registered under the system.
b) Registration shall entail the submission of the requirements specified by
the DBM-PS. Submission of these requirements may be done on-line at
the PhilGEPS website or physically at the PhilGEPS office. Registration
shall be effective for one year and may be renewed, provided that the
manufacturer, supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant concerned
maintains its registration current and updated at least once a year, or
more frequently when needed.
c) Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants
applying for registration must also indicate their account number with a
bank duly licensed by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) to facilitate
payment as well as the posting of bid and performance security, when
applicable. Any information submitted in connection with this subsection
shall be kept confidential.
d) The PhilGEPS shall deny registration to or exclude from the registry any
party that is found to have willfully misrepresented any of the information
provided in the application for registration or who is in the “blacklist” of
the Government or any of its Procuring Entities in accordance with Section
69.4 of this IRR, including foreign government/foreign or international
financing institution whose blacklisting rules have been recognized by the
GPPB.
e) A manufacturer, supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant applying for
registration shall be required to provide an e-mail address to which all
communications from the BAC and the Procuring Entity shall be sent. The
e-mail address provided shall be considered as such applicant’s
information system for purposes of reckoning the date of sending or
receipt of electronic messages or documents.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
22
f) Registered manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and
consultants shall secure a digital certificate from the governmentaccredited certification authority to be able to participate in the
procurement activities of the PhilGEPS.
g) Registration with the PhilGEPS is not an accreditation and thus not
tantamount to a finding of eligibility, nor is it a guaranty that a
manufacturer, supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant may
participate in a competitive bidding without first being determined to be
eligible for that particular competitive bidding.
8.2.3. The Electronic Catalogue
a) The PhilGEPS shall have a centralized electronic catalogue of common and
non-common use goods, supplies, materials and equipment.
b) Procuring Entities shall procure common-use goods, supplies, materials
and equipment from the Electronic Catalogue in the PhilGEPS. To be able
to use the PhilGEPS, Procuring Entities shall be required to register and
designate the officials or personnel authorized to transact with and
operate the PhilGEPS from such Procuring Entities’ terminals.
c) Procuring Entities without internet access may avail of the PhilGEPS Public
Access Terminals which shall be installed at DBM-designated locations in
the provinces and in Metro Manila: Provided, however, That they shall
comply with Section 8.3 of this IRR.
d) The Electronic Catalogue may also feature non-common use items that
may be procured directly and without competitive bidding by Procuring
Entities from suppliers through the PhilGEPS Virtual Store: Provided,
however, That for an item to be carried in the Electronic Catalogue for
this purpose, the supplier thereof must have been determined as the
Lowest Calculated Responsive Bidder in a previous bidding conducted by
DBM-PS or by a Procuring Entity for DBM-PS: Provided, further, That such
item will be featured in the Electronic Catalogue for a maximum period of
six (6) months unless another supplier offers a price lower by at least five
percent (5%) and such supplier is determined by the DBM-PS or by the
Procuring Entity that conducted the previous bidding for DBM-PS to meet
the eligibility and bidding requirements for the item, in which case the
item from the latter supplier will be that featured in the Electronic
Catalogue for the remainder of the six (6)-month period.
8.2.4. Additional Features
The PhilGEPS shall also feature a Virtual Store, Electronic Payment, Electronic
Bid Submission, and such other features as may be developed in the future.
8.2.4.1. Virtual Store
The PhilGEPS may have a feature that will enable the ordering of
common-use and non-common use items online called a virtual
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
23
store. The virtual store shall be open only to registered Procuring
Entities and may not be accessed by suppliers.
8.2.4.2. Electronic Payment
The PhilGEPS may support e-payment functions to pay for goods
purchased through the Virtual Store to manage the generation of
purchase orders and the payment of bids processed through the
system.
The focus of this feature is to facilitate the electronic transfer of
funds from DBM-PS to and from Procuring Entities and suppliers, and
from Procuring Entities to suppliers, for bids managed directly by the
Procuring Entity. The system shall:
a) Generate purchase orders from a bid notice, award notice or
contract;
b) Support approval process for purchase orders before any
payment or fund transfer is processed;
c) Have a process to submit request for payment upon delivery of
goods and/or services and the completion of the approval
process; and
d) Have the ability to interface with the designated bank of the
Procuring Entity and suppliers to support the electronic transfer
of funds.
8.2.4.3. Electronic Bid Submission16
The PhilGEPS may support the implementation of e-Bid submission
processes, which includes creation of electronic bid forms, creation of
bid box, delivery of bid submissions, notification to supplier of receipt
of bids, bid receiving and electronic bid evaluation. This facility shall
cover all types of procurement for Goods, Infrastructure Projects and
Consulting Services.
8.3. Use of the PhilGEPS
8.3.1. All Procuring Entities are mandated to fully use the PhilGEPS in accordance
with the policies, rules, regulations, and procedures adopted by the GPPB and
embodied in this IRR. In this connection, all Procuring Entities shall register
with the PhilGEPS and shall undertake measures to ensure their access to an
on-line network to facilitate the open, speedy and efficient on-line
transmission, conveyance and use of electronic data messages or electronic
documents. The DBM-PS shall assist Procuring Entities to ensure their on-line
connectivity and help in training their personnel responsible for the operation
of the PhilGEPS from their terminals.
8.3.2. The rules and regulations governing the manual method of procurement shall
apply whenever the rules in this Section are silent. Further, the GPPB is
16 Refer to Appendix 3 for the Guidelines for Electronic Bidding (E-Bidding).
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
24
authorized to approve changes in the procurement process to adapt to
improvements in modern technology, provided that such modifications are
consistent with the provisions of Section 3 of the Act and this IRR.
8.4. Pre-bid Conferences and Notices under the PhilGEPS
8.4.1. Pre-bid conferences shall be conducted in accordance with Section 22 of this
IRR. (a)
8.4.2. Requests for clarification from bidders may be sent electronically to the BAC.
To be binding on bidders, clarifications and amendments to the Invitation to
Bid/Request for Expression of Interest and to the Bidding Documents shall be
in the form of Supplemental/Bid Bulletins which shall be posted in the
PhilGEPS bulletin board.
8.4.3. The Supplemental/Bid Bulletins mentioned in the immediately preceding
Subsection as well as all other notices to be made by the BAC to the bidders
or prospective bidders shall be posted in the PhilGEPS bulletin board and sent
electronically to the e-mail address indicated in the bidders’ registration.
8.5. Registration, Eligibility Requirements and Submission of Bids under the PhilGEPS
8.5.1. To ensure the widest dissemination of the Invitation to Bid/Request for
Expression of Interest, manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors
and/or consultants shall register with the PhilGEPS. All Procuring Entities
already maintaining an electronic registry upon the effectivity of this IRR shall
integrate the same with that of the PhilGEPS. A manufacturer, supplier,
distributor, contractor or consultant duly registered with the PhilGEPS may
participate in a procurement undertaken by any Procuring Entity, provided
that the said manufacturer, supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant
maintains its registration current and updated in accordance with the
provisions of this IRR, and its registration is proper and relevant to the
particular type of procurement.
8.5.2. All bidders shall upload and maintain in PhilGEPS a current and updated file of
the following Class “A” eligibility documents under Sections 23.1(a) and
24.1(a):17
a) Registration Certificate;
b) Mayor’s/Business Permit or its Equivalent Document;
c) Tax Clearance;
d) Philippine Contractors Accreditation Board (PCAB) license and
registration; and
e) Audited Financial Statements.
17 Informing all procuring entities on the deferment of the implementation of the mandatory submission of PhilGEPS Certificate
of Registration and Membership through GPPB Circular No. 07-2017, dated 31 July 2017, published in the Philippine Daily
Inquirer on 18 August 2017.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
25
For Foreign Bidders, the foregoing documents may be substituted by the
appropriate equivalent documents in English, if any, issued by the country of
the bidder concerned. Otherwise, it must be accompanied by a translation of
the documents in English issued by the relevant foreign government agency,
the foreign government agency authorized to translate documents, or a
registered translator in the foreign bidder’s country; and shall be
authenticated by the appropriate Philippine foreign service establishment/post
or the equivalent office having jurisdiction over the foreign bidder’s affairs in
the Philippines.
However, for Contracting Parties to the Apostille Convention, the documents
shall be authenticated through an apostille by the Competent Authority,
except for countries18 identified by the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA)
that will still require legalization (red ribbon) by the relevant Embassy or
Consulate.19
(n)
A Contracting Party refers to a State that has joined the Apostille Convention,
whether or not the Convention has entered into force for that State.20
(n)
A Competent Authority refers to the authority designated by a Contracting
Party that is competent to issue an apostille. A Contracting Party may
designate one or more Competent Authorities and may designate Competent
Authorities that are competent to issue an apostille for certain categories of
public documents. Information about designated Competent Authorities may
be found on the Apostille Section of the Hague Conference website under
“Competent Authorities”. The PE can confirm the list of Competent Authorities
using the link below:
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/authorities1/?cid=41.
21
(n)
These documents shall be accompanied by a Sworn Statement in a form
prescribed by the GPPB stating that the documents submitted are complete
and authentic copies of the original, and all statements and information
provided therein are true and correct. Upon receipt of the said documents,
the PhilGEPS shall process the same in accordance with the guidelines on the
Government of the Philippines – Official Merchants Registry (GoP-OMR) and
shall issue a Certificate of Platinum Registration and Membership.22 The said
Certificate shall include the following certification by the Bidder:
a. the authenticity, genuineness, validity, and completeness of the copy of
the original eligibility documents submitted;
b. the veracity of the statements and information contained therein;
c. that the Certificate is neither a guaranty that the named registrant will be
declared eligible without first being determined to be such for that
18 As of 14 May 2019, Austria, Finland, Germany and Greece.
19 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 13-2019, dated 23 May 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
20 Ibid.
21 Ibid.
22 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
26
particular bidding nor is it evidence that the same has passed the postqualification stage; and
d. that any finding of concealment, falsification, or misrepresentation of any
of the eligibility documents submitted, or the contents thereof shall be a
ground for disqualification of the Bidder from further participation in the
bidding process, without prejudice to the imposition of appropriate
administrative, civil and criminal penalty in accordance with the laws.
For the purpose of updating the Certificate of Registration and Membership,
all Class “A” eligibility documents mentioned in this section supporting the
veracity, authenticity and validity of the Certificate shall remain current and
updated. The failure by the prospective bidder to update its Certificate with
the current and updated Class “A” eligibility documents shall result in the
automatic suspension of the validity of its Certificate until such time that all of
the expired Class “A” eligibility documents has been updated.23
8.5.3. Registered bidders determined to be eligible may submit their bids at any
time before the closing date specified in the Bidding Documents. The
PhilGEPS shall bar all incoming bids after such prescribed date and time. (a)
8.5.4. The PhilGEPS shall have a feature that allows the electronic submission of
eligibility requirements and bids.
8.5.5. Upon receipt of a bid, the PhilGEPS shall generate and send a message to the
bidder acknowledging such receipt.
8.6. Opening of Bids under the PhilGEPS
8.6.1. The BAC shall have the sole authority to open the bids.
8.6.2. Only the financial proposals of bidders whose technical proposals meet the
minimum technical requirements shall be opened or decrypted.
8.6.3. An update of all procurement contracts, regardless of whether procurement is
done electronically or manually, shall be posted on the PhilGEPS bulletin
board. The update shall include, but shall not be limited to, the status of
procurement contracts, including the names of contract awardees and the
amount of the contract.
8.6.4. Without prejudice to criminal prosecution under the applicable provisions of
the Act and this IRR, R.A. 8792, R.A. 3019, otherwise known as the “AntiGraft and Corrupt Practices Act,” and other applicable penal laws, public
officials and employees who commit any of the following acts shall be
deemed to have committed grave misconduct and shall be sanctioned and/or
penalized in accordance with the applicable Civil Service rules and
regulations:
23 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
27
a) Opening or decryption, by whatever means, of bids submitted through
the PhilGEPS ahead of the appointed time for the opening or decryption
of such bids;
b) Causing the unauthorized disclosure of any information or document
submitted through the PhilGEPS;
c) Hacking into or cracking the PhilGEPS, or aiding another person to hack
into or crack the same; or
d) Any other act that breaches or violates the security, integrity, and
confidentiality of the PhilGEPS.
8.6.5. When any of the foregoing acts is done by the administrator(s) or
employee(s) of a service provider hired by a Procuring Entity, or in collusion
with, or by a private party who is a participant in the bidding process, said
administrator(s), employee(s) or private party shall be imposed the
corresponding sanctions and/or penalties under this IRR.
8.7. Observers
The PhilGEPS shall allow observers, duly authorized by the BAC, to monitor the
procurement proceedings on-line: Provided, however, That such observers do not
have any direct or indirect interest in the contract to be bid as prescribed in Section
13 of this IRR.
Section 9. Security, Integrity and Confidentiality
The PhilGEPS shall incorporate the following features, which shall be periodically upgraded
to keep abreast with developments in technology:
a) Security – The PhilGEPS shall be protected from unauthorized access or interference
through the incorporation of security features such as, but not limited to, firewalls.
Periodic tests shall be conducted to ensure that the system cannot be breached.
b) Integrity – The PhilGEPS shall ensure that no person, including the system
administrators and chairperson and members of the BAC, shall be able to alter the
contents of bids submitted through the system or read the same ahead of the
stipulated time for the decryption or opening of bids. For this purpose, bids submitted
through the PhilGEPS shall be sealed through electronic keys. The authenticity of
messages and documents submitted through the PhilGEPS shall also be ensured by
the use of electronic signatures.
c) Confidentiality – The PhilGEPS shall ensure the privacy of parties transacting with it.
For this purpose, no electronic message or document sent through the system shall be
divulged to third parties unless such electronic message or document was sent after
the sender was informed that the same will be made publicly available. The PhilGEPS
shall protect the intellectual property rights over documents, including technical
designs, submitted in response to Invitations to Bid.
d) Audit Trail – The PhilGEPS shall include a feature that provides for an audit trail for online transactions, and allows the Commission on Audit (COA) to verify the security and
integrity of the system at any time.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
28
e) Performance Tracking – The performance of manufacturers, suppliers, distributors,
contractors and consultants shall be tracked to monitor compliance with delivery
schedules and other performance indicators. Similarly, the performance of Procuring
Entities shall be tracked to monitor the settlement of their obligations to
manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants.
RULE IV – COMPETITIVE BIDDING
Section 10. Competitive Bidding
All procurement shall be done through competitive bidding, except as provided in Rule XVI
of this IRR.
RULE V – BIDS AND AWARDS COMMITTEE
Section 11. The BAC and its Composition
11.1 BAC Structure
11.1.1 Each Procuring Entity shall establish in its head office a single BAC to
undertake the functions specified in Section 12 of this IRR in order to
facilitate professionalization and harmonization of procedures and standards.
In line with the standardization of procurement procedures and the thrust
towards strengthening the procurement function to increase operational
efficiency and effectiveness, Heads of Procuring Entities shall aim to
consolidate or unify all procurement activities of the organization, whether
locally-funded or foreign-assisted, and whether pertaining to Goods,
Infrastructure Projects or Consulting Services.
11.1.2 However, to expedite the procurement process for practical intents and
purposes, the HoPE may create separate BACs where the number and
complexity of the items to be procured shall so warrant. The BACs may be
organized either according to: (a) geographical location of PMO or end-user
or implementing units of the Procuring Entity; or (b) nature of procurement.
Similar committees for decentralized and lower level offices may also be
formed when deemed necessary by the HoPE.
11.2 BAC Composition
11.2.1 The HoPE shall designate at least five (5) but not more than seven (7)
members to the BAC of unquestionable integrity and procurement
proficiency.
11.2.2 The BAC for NGAs, departments, bureaus, offices, or instrumentalities of the
GoP, including the judicial and legislative branches, constitutional
commissions, SUCs, GOCCs, and GFIs shall be composed of the following:
Regular Members:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
29
a) Chairperson, who is at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent official of the
Procuring Entity;
b) An officer, who is at least a fifth (5th) ranking permanent official, or if not
available, an officer of the next lower rank with knowledge, experience
and/or expertise in procurement who, to the extent possible, represents
the legal or administrative area of the Procuring Entity: Provided, That in
the case of bureaus, regional offices and sub-regional/district offices, BAC
members shall be at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent personnel or if
not available, an officer of the next lower rank;
c) An officer, who is at least a fifth (5th) ranking permanent official, or if not
available, an officer of the next lower rank with knowledge, experience
and/or expertise in procurement who, to the extent possible, represents
the finance area of the Procuring Entity: Provided, That in the case of
bureaus, regional offices and sub-regional/district offices, BAC members
shall be at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent personnel or if not
available, an officer of the next lower rank;
Provisional Members:
d) An officer who has technical expertise relevant to the procurement at
hand, and, to the extent possible, has knowledge, experience and/or
expertise in procurement; and
e) A representative from the end-user or implementing unit who has
knowledge of procurement laws and procedures. When procurement
tasks are outsourced to another GoP agency as a procurement agent
pursuant to Section 7.3.3, a representative from the Procuring Entity
may be designated as a provisional member to the BAC. For this
purpose, the procuring entity shall recommend the provisional member
to be designated.
The Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson shall also be designated by
the HoPE. Moreover, the Vice-Chairperson shall be a regular member of
the BAC. For purposes of this IRR, the term “permanent” shall refer to a
plantilla position within the Procuring Entity concerned. (a)
11.2.3 The BAC for Local Government Units shall be composed of the following:
a.) For Provinces, Cities, and Municipalities
i. One representative each from the regular offices under the Office
of the Local Chief Executive such as, but not limited to, the
following: Office of the Administrator, Budget Office, Legal Office,
Engineering Office, General Services Offices; and
ii. A representative from the end user unit.
The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be designated by the
Local Chief Executive. The Chairperson of the BAC shall be at
least a third (3rd) ranking permanent official of the Procuring
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
30
Entity. The members of the BAC shall be personnel occupying
plantilla positions of the Procuring Entity concerned.
b) For Barangays:
i. The BAC shall be composed of at least five (5), but not more than
seven (7) regular members of the Sangguniang Barangay, except
the Punong Barangay.
ii. The Punong Barangay, being the Local Chief Executive, shall
designate the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and members of the
BAC.(a)
11.2.4 The HoPE may designate alternate BAC members, who shall have the same
qualifications as that of the members originally designated under Section
11.2.2 of this IRR. The alternate members shall attend meetings of the BAC
and receive the proportionate honoraria, whenever the original members are
absent. The alternate members shall have the same term as the original
members. (a)
11.2.5 In no case shall the HoPE and/or the approving authority be the Chairperson or
a member of the BAC.
11.2.6 Unless sooner removed for a cause, the members of the BAC shall have a fixed
term of one (1) year reckoned from the date of appointment, renewable at the
discretion of the HoPE. Upon expiration of the terms of the current members,
they shall continue to exercise their functions until new BAC members are
designated. In case of resignation, retirement, separation, transfer, reassignment, removal, or death, the replacement shall serve only for the
unexpired term: Provided, however, That in case of leave or suspension, the
replacement shall serve only for the duration of the leave or suspension. For
justifiable causes, a member shall be suspended or removed by the HoPE.
Section 12. Functions of the BAC
12.1 The BAC shall have the following functions: (a) advertise and/or post the invitation to
bid/request for expressions of interest; (b) conduct pre-procurement and pre-bid
conferences; (c) determine the eligibility of prospective bidders; (d) receive and open
bids; (e) conduct the evaluation of bids; (f) undertake post-qualification proceedings;
(g) resolve requests for reconsideration; (h) recommend award of contracts to the
HoPE or his duly authorized representative: (i) recommend the imposition of
sanctions in accordance with Rule XXIII; (j) recommend to the HoPE the use of
Alternative Methods of Procurement as provided in Rule XVI hereof; k) conduct any
of the Alternative Methods of Procurement; l) conduct periodic assessment of the
procurement processes and procedures to streamline procurement activities pursuant
to Section 3(c) of this IRR; and m) perform such other related functions as may be
necessary, including the creation of a Technical Working Group (TWG) from a pool of
technical, financial, and/or legal experts to assist in the following:
i. Review of the Technical Specifications, Scope of Work, and Terms of
Reference;
ii. Review of Bidding Documents;
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
31
iii. Shortlisting of Consultants;
iv. Eligibility Screening;
v. Evaluation of Bids;
vi. Post-Qualification; and
vii. Resolution of Request for Reconsideration.
To the extent possible, the BAC in central offices shall render necessary assistance to
its regional or lower office BACs to facilitate the conduct of procurement from preprocurement conference to the post-qualification stage. (a)
12.2 The BAC shall be responsible for ensuring that the Procuring Entity abides by the
standards set forth by the Act and this IRR, and it shall prepare a Procurement
Monitoring Report (PMR) in the form prescribed by the GPPB.24 The PMR shall cover
all procurement activities specified in the APP, whether ongoing and completed, from
the holding of the pre-procurement conference to the issuance of notice of award
and the approval of the contract, including the standard and actual time for each
major procurement activity. The PMR shall be approved and submitted by the HoPE
to the GPPB in electronic format25 within fourteen (14) calendar days after the end of
each semester. The PMR shall likewise be posted in accordance with E.O. 662, s.
2007, as amended. (a)
12.3 Quorum
A majority of the total BAC composition as designated by the HoPE shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, provided that the presence of the
Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson shall be required.
For purposes of determining a quorum, a member of the BAC, which include the
Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson, may be present, either in person or face-toface through videoconferencing, webcasting or similar technology for procuring
entities with such technology.26
(n)
12.4 Meetings
The Chairperson or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at all
meetings of the BAC. Meetings of the BAC may be conducted electronically for
procuring entities with videoconferencing, webcasting, or similar technology
capability. The decision of at least a majority of those present, either in person, faceto-face through videoconferencing, webcasting or similar technology, or a
combination thereof, at a meeting at which there is quorum shall be valid and
binding as an act of the BAC: Provided, however, That the Chairperson or, in his
absence, the Vice-Chairperson, shall vote only in case of a tie.27
(a)
24 Refer to Appendix 5 for the Procurement Monitoring Report (PMR) Format.
25 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 11-2020, dated 20 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 27 May
2020.
26 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 24-2018, dated 4 December 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
27 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
32
Section 13. Observers28
13.1 To enhance the transparency of the process, the BAC shall, during the eligibility
checking, shortlisting, pre-bid conference, preliminary examination of bids, bid
evaluation, and post-qualification, invite, in addition to the representative of the
COA, at least two (2) observers, who shall not have the right to vote, to sit in its
proceedings where:
1. At least one (1) shall come from a duly recognized private group in a sector
or discipline relevant to the procurement at hand, for example:
a) For Infrastructure Projects, national associations of constructors duly
recognized by the Construction Industry Authority of the Philippines
(CIAP), such as, but not limited to the following:
(1) Philippine Constructors Association, Inc.; or
(2) National Constructors Association of the Philippines, Inc.
b) For Goods, a specific relevant chamber-member of the Philippine Chamber
of Commerce and Industry.
c) For Consulting Services, a project-related professional organization
accredited or duly recognized by the Professional Regulation Commission
or the Supreme Court, such as, but not limited to:
(1) Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers (PICE);
(2) Philippine Institute of Certified Public Accountants (PICPA); or
(3) Confederation of Filipino Consulting Organizations; and
2. The other observer shall come from a non-government organization (NGO).(a)
13.2 The observers shall come from an organization duly registered with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) or the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA),
and should meet the following criteria:
a) Knowledge, experience or expertise in procurement or in the subject matter
of the contract to be bid;
b) Absence of actual or potential conflict of interest in the contract to be bid;
and
c) Any other relevant criteria that may be determined by the BAC.
13.3 Observers shall be invited at least five (5) calendar days before the date of the
procurement stage/activity. The absence of observers will not nullify the BAC
proceedings: Provided, That they have been duly invited in writing. The Procuring
Entities should ensure that the invitation is received at least five (5) calendar days
before each procurement activity. In the event that a procurement activity has to
be postponed, the observers shall be notified immediately of the change in
schedule. (a)
13.4 The observers shall have the following responsibilities:
a) To prepare the report either jointly or separately indicating their observations
made on the procurement activities conducted by the BAC for submission to
the HoPE, copy furnished the BAC Chairperson. The report shall assess the
28 As amended by GPPB Circular No. 01-2021, dated 4 March 2021, published in the Philippine Star on 15 March 2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
33
extent of the BAC’s compliance with the provisions of this IRR and areas of
improvement in the BAC’s proceedings;
b) To submit their report to the Procuring Entity and furnish a copy to the GPPB
and Office of the Ombudsman/Resident Ombudsman. If no report is
submitted by the observer within seven (7) calendar days after each
procurement activity, then it is presumed that the bidding activity conducted
by the BAC followed the correct procedure; and
c) To immediately inhibit and notify in writing the Procuring Entity concerned of
any actual or potential interest in the contract to be bid.(a)
13.5 Observers shall be allowed access to or be provided with the following documents
free of charge upon their request: (a) minutes of BAC meetings; (b) abstract of
Bids; (c) post-qualification summary report; (d) APP and related PPMP; and (e)
opened proposals. In all instances, observers shall be required to enter into a
confidentiality agreement with the concerned Procuring Entity in accordance with
the form prescribed by the GPPB.29
(a)
Section 14. BAC Secretariat/ Procurement Unit
14.1 The HoPE shall create a Secretariat which will serve as the main support unit of the
BAC. An existing organic office within the Procuring Entity may also be designated to
serve as Secretariat. To strengthen and promote the professionalization of the
organizations’ procuring unit, the HoPE may create procurement units that may serve
concurrently as BAC Secretariat in accordance with the guidelines issued by DBM.
The Secretariat shall have the following functions and responsibilities:
a) Provide administrative support to the BAC and the TWG;
b) Organize and make all necessary arrangements for BAC and the TWG meetings
and conferences;
c) Prepare minutes of meetings and resolutions of the BAC;
d) Take custody of procurement documents and other records and ensure that all
procurements undertaken by the Procuring Entity are properly documented;
e) Manage the sale and distribution of Bidding Documents to interested bidders;
f) Advertise and/or post bidding opportunities, including Bidding Documents, and
notices of awards;
g) Assist in managing the procurement processes;
h) Monitor procurement activities and milestones for proper reporting to relevant
agencies when required;
i) Consolidate PPMPs from various units of the Procuring Entity to make them
available for review as indicated in Section 7 of this IRR and prepare the APP;
and
29 Confidentiality Agreement based on the 2014 Procurement Observer’s Guide. Refer to Appendix 6 for the Confidentiality
Agreement Format.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
34
j) Act as the central channel of communications for the BAC with end-user or
implementing units, PMOs, other units of the line agency, other government
agencies, providers of goods, infrastructure projects, and consulting services,
observers, and the general public. (a)
14.2 In case of an existing ad hoc Secretariat, the HoPE shall assign full-time support staff
to their BAC Secretariat. The head of the Secretariat in central offices shall be at
least a fifth (5th) ranking permanent employee or, if not available, a permanent
employee of lower rank; or shall be at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent
employee in bureaus, regional offices and sub-regional/ district offices, or if not
available, a permanent employee of lower rank. In addition to integrity, Heads of
Procuring Entities shall consider procurement proficiency as a factor in designating
the head of the Secretariat and Procurement Unit. (a)
14.3 To expedite the procurement process, the HoPE shall ensure that the members of
the BAC, its Secretariat and TWG, shall give utmost priority to BAC assignments over
all other duties and responsibilities, until the requirements for the said assignments
at hand are completed. (a)
Section 15. Honoraria of BAC, BAC Secretariat, and TWG Members
The Procuring Entity may grant payment of honoraria to the BAC members in an amount not
to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of their respective basic monthly salary subject to
availability of funds. For this purpose, the DBM shall promulgate the necessary guidelines.30
The Procuring Entity may also grant payment of honoraria to the BAC Secretariat and the
TWG members, subject to the relevant rules of the DBM.
Section 16. Professionalization of BAC, TWG Members and Procurement Units
The GPPB shall establish a sustained training program to develop the capability of the BACs,
BAC Secretariats, TWGs, and the Procurement Units of Procuring Entities, and
professionalize the same.
The HoPE shall ensure that the BAC, its Secretariat and TWG members, including other
relevant procurement personnel are sent to attend procurement training or capacity
development program. Within six (6) months upon designation, the BAC, its Secretariat and
TWG members should have satisfactorily completed such training or program conducted,
authorized or accredited by the GPPB through its Technical Support Office.31
The HoPE is encouraged to attend similar procurement training and capacity development
activities. (a)
RULE VI - PREPARATION OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS
Section 17. Form and Contents of Bidding Documents
30 Refer to Appendix 7 for the Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Government Personnel Involved in Government
Procurement.
31 Refer to GPPB Circular No. 07-2018 dated 4 September 2018. Integrated in the 2016 updated IRR of R.A. No. 9184 as
Appendix 29.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
35
17.1 The Bidding Documents shall be prepared by the Procuring Entity following the
standard forms and manuals prescribed by the GPPB.32 The Bidding Documents shall
include the following:
a) ABC;
b) Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest;
c) Eligibility Requirements;
d) Instructions to Bidders, including scope of bid, documents comprising the bid,
criteria for eligibility, bid evaluation methodology/criteria in accordance with
the Act, and post-qualification, as well as the date, time and place of the prebid conference (where applicable), submission of bids and opening of bids;
e) Terms of Reference, for Consulting Services;
f) Scope of work, where applicable;
g) Plans/Drawings and Technical Specifications;
h) Form of Bid, Price Form, and List of Goods or Bill of Quantities;
i) Delivery Time or Completion Schedule;
j) Form, Amount, and Validity Period of Bid Security;
k) Form, Amount, and Validity of Performance Security and Warranty; and
l) Form of Contract and General and Special Conditions of Contract.
17.2 The specifications and other terms in the Bidding Documents shall reflect the
necessary specifications required to meet the needs of the Procuring Entity in clear
and unambiguous terms.
In mixed procurements, the Procuring Entity shall specify in the Bidding Documents
the requirements, criteria and other conditions of the bidding procedures and of the
ensuing contract as applicable to each component of the project. In the preparation
of Bidding Documents, the Procuring Entity shall ensure compliance with existing
laws, rules and regulations, especially those concerning licenses and permits required
for the project, in accordance with Section 34.2 of this IRR. (a)
17.3 To provide prospective bidders ample time to examine the Bidding Documents and to
prepare their respective bids, the concerned BAC shall make the Bidding Documents
available from the time the Invitation to Bid / Request for Expression of Interest is
first advertised/posted until the deadline for the submission and receipt of bids.(a)
17.4 Bidders may be asked to pay a fee to recover the cost for the preparation and
development of the Bidding Documents pursuant to the Guidelines on the Sale of
Bidding Documents.33 The Procuring Entity shall post the complete Bidding
Documents at its website and the PhilGEPS website from the time the Invitation to
32 Refer to GPPP Circular No. 04-2020 dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
33 Refer to Appendix 8 for the Guidelines on the Sale of Bidding Documents.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
36
Bid/Request for Expression of Interest is advertised. Bidding Documents may be
downloaded from any of the said websites: Provided, That upon submission of their
bids, the bidders shall pay the applicable fee, if required. The Bidding Documents
may also be secured from the BAC Secretariat upon payment of the corresponding
fee, if required. (a)
17.5 Bidding Documents Fee may be refunded in accordance with the aforementioned
Guidelines based on the grounds provided for under Section 41 of the Act and this
IRR. (n)
17.6 Detailed Engineering for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects
No bidding and award of contract for Infrastructure Projects shall be made unless the
detailed engineering investigations, surveys and designs, for the project have been
sufficiently carried out and duly approved in accordance with the standards and
specifications prescribed by the HoPE concerned or his duly authorized
representative, pursuant to the recommendation of the end-user or implementing
unit and in accordance with the provisions of Annex “A”34 of this IRR. In case of
projects with pending acquisition of right-of-way site or location, the procurement
process may commence, but no award of contract shall be made until an authority or
permit to enter is issued by the property owner; or a notarized deed of sale or deed
of donation is executed in favor of the government; or a writ of possession is issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction, as the case may be.
The exception is in case of design and build scheme, wherein the bidders shall be
allowed to submit its preliminary engineering designs as part of its bid. The
procedures for the procurement and contract implementation of Infrastructure
Projects using a design and build scheme shall be in accordance with the provisions
of Annex “G”35 of this IRR. (a)
Section 18. Reference to Brand Names
Specifications for the procurement of Goods shall be based on relevant characteristics,
functionality and/or performance requirements. Reference to brand names shall not be
allowed except for items or parts that are compatible with the existing fleet or equipment of
the same make and brand, and to maintain the performance, functionality and useful life of
the equipment.
This Section shall also apply to the goods component of Infrastructure Projects and
Consulting Services. (a)
Section 19. Access to Information
In all stages of the preparation of the Bidding Documents, the Procuring Entity shall ensure
equal access to information. Prior to their official release to prospective bidders, no aspect
or part of the Bidding Documents shall be divulged or released to any prospective bidder or
person having direct or indirect interest in the project to be procured, or to any party,
except those officially authorized in the handling of the documents. (a)
However, in procurements involving and affecting national security, the disclosure of the
specific components of the procurement documents, such as, the technical specifications,
34 Detailed Engineering for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects.
35 Guidelines for the Procurement and Implementation of Contracts for Design and Build Infrastructure Projects.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
37
requirements and components, shall be dependent upon the HoPE having due regard to the
nature, classification, sensitivity and confidentiality of the relevant documents vis-à-vis the
purpose and reason for the request.
36 (n)
RULE VII – INVITATION TO BID
Section 20. Pre-procurement Conference
20.1 Prior to the advertisement or the issuance of the Invitation to Bid/Request for
Expression of Interest for each procurement undertaken through a competitive
bidding, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall call for a pre-procurement conference.
The pre-procurement conference shall be attended by the BAC, the Secretariat, the
unit or officials, including consultants hired by the Procuring Entity, who prepared the
Bidding Documents and the draft Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest
for each procurement. During this conference, the participants, led by the BAC, shall:
a) Confirm the description and scope of the contract, the ABC, and contract
duration;
b) Ensure that the procurement is in accordance with the PPMP and APP;
c) Determine the readiness of the procurement at hand, including, among other
aspects, the following:
i) The availability of appropriations. In the case of EPA, the inclusion of the
procurement project in the proposed funding source, i.e., the GAA,
appropriations ordinance, corporate budget, or loan agreement, as the
case may be.37
(n)
ii) completeness of the Bidding Documents and their adherence to relevant
general procurement guidelines;
iii) completion of the detailed engineering according to the prescribed
standards in the case of Infrastructure Projects; and
iv) confirmation of the availability of right-of-way site or location, and the
possession of affected properties, subject to Section 17.6 of this IRR.
d) Review, modify and agree on the criteria for eligibility screening, evaluation,
and post-qualification;
e) Review and adopt the procurement schedule, including deadlines and
timeframes, for the different activities; and
f) Reiterate and emphasize the importance of confidentiality, in accordance with
Section 19 of this IRR, and the applicable sanctions and penalties, as well as
agree on measures to ensure compliance with the foregoing. (a)
36 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 21-2017, dated 30 May 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20 November
2017.
37 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 14-2019, dated 17 July 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
38
20.2 The holding of a pre-procurement conference may not be required for small
procurements, i.e., procurement of Goods costing Two Million Pesos (₱2,000,000.00)
and below, procurement of Infrastructure Projects costing Five Million Pesos
(₱5,000,000.00) and below, and procurement of Consulting Services costing One
Million Pesos (₱1,000,000.00) and below.
Section 21. Advertising and Contents of the Invitation to Bid/Request for
Expression of Interest
21.1 Contents of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest
The Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest shall provide prospective
bidders the following information, among others:
a) For the procurement of:
i) Goods, the name of the contract to be bid and a brief description of the
goods to be procured;
ii) Infrastructure Projects, the name and location of the contract to be bid,
the project background and other relevant information regarding the
proposed contract works, including a brief description of the type, size,
major items, and other important or relevant features of the works; and
iii) Consulting services, the name of the contract to be bid, a general
description of the project and other important or relevant information;
b) The name of the project, identification and number of lots or items specific to
the bidding, as well as the basis of evaluation of the project, lots, or items,
where applicable;
c) A general statement on the criteria to be used by the Procuring Entity for the
eligibility check, the short listing of prospective bidders, in the case of the
procurement of Consulting Services, the examination and evaluation of bids,
post-qualification, and award;
d) The date, time and place of the deadline for the submission and receipt of the
eligibility requirements, the pre-bid conference if any, the submission and
receipt of bids, and the opening of bids;
e) ABC for the project, lot, or item to be bid;
f) The source of funding;
g) The place, time and website where the Bidding Documents may be secured or
downloaded, and, where required, the price of the Bidding Documents, in
accordance with Section 17.4 of this IRR;
h) The contract duration or delivery schedule;
i) The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, e-mail and website
addresses of the concerned Procuring Entity, as well as its designated contact
person; and
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
39
j) Such other necessary information deemed relevant by the Procuring Entity;
and (a)
k) For electronic bid submission, the Invitation to Bid, including the Bidding
Documents shall clearly state whether the PE shall allow the submission and
receipt of bids through electronic means.38
21.2 Advertising and Posting of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest
21.2.1 Except as otherwise provided in Section 54.2 of this IRR and for the
procurement of common-use goods and supplies, the Invitation to
Bid/Request for Expression of Interest shall be:
a) Posted at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the
premises of the Procuring Entity concerned for seven (7) calendar
days as certified by the head of the BAC Secretariat of the Procuring
Entity concerned; and
b) Posted continuously in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the
Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and the website prescribed
by the foreign government/foreign or international financing
institution, if applicable, for seven (7) calendar days starting on date
of advertisement.
Procuring Entities that cannot post its opportunities in the PhilGEPS for
justifiable reasons shall continue to publish its advertisements in a newspaper
of general nationwide circulation. (a)
21.2.2 If the Procuring Entity will allow electronic bid submission, the highest
official managing the Information Technology system of the agency shall
issue a Certification based on the prescribed form of the GPPB.39
The said Certification shall be submitted to the GPPB-TSO prior to posting
of the Bidding Documents allowing for electronic submission and receipt
of bids.40
Section 22. Pre-bid Conference
22.1 For contracts to be bid with an ABC of One Million Pesos (₱1,000,000.00) or more,
the BAC shall convene at least one (1) pre-bid conference to clarify and/or explain
any of the requirements, terms, conditions, and specifications stipulated in the
Bidding Documents. For contracts to be bid with an ABC of less than One Million
Pesos (₱1,000,000), pre-bid conferences may be conducted at the discretion of the
BAC. Subject to the approval of the BAC, a pre-bid conference may also be
conducted upon written request of any prospective bidder.
22.2 The pre-bid conference shall be held at least twelve (12) calendar days before the
deadline for the submission and receipt of bids, but not earlier than seven (7)
38 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
39 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 12-2020, dated 20 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 30 May
2020.
40 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
40
calendar days from the PhilGEPS posting of the Invitation to Bid or Bidding
Documents and in the case of Consulting Services, from the determination of the
shortlisted consultants. If the Procuring Entity determines that, by reason of the
method, nature, or complexity of the contract to be bid or when international
participation will be more advantageous to the GoP, a longer period for the
preparation of bids is necessary, the pre-bid conference shall be held at least thirty
(30) calendar days before the deadline for the submission and receipt of bids.(a)
22.3 The pre-bid conference shall discuss, clarify and explain, among other things, the
eligibility requirements and the technical and financial components of the contract to
be bid including questions and clarifications raised by the prospective bidders before
and during the Pre-Bid Conference.
Pre-bid conference may be conducted in person or face-to-face through
videoconferencing, webcasting, or similar technology, or a combination thereof.
Procuring Entities with videoconferencing capabilities that have manufacturers,
suppliers, distributors, contractors and/or consultants that also have
videoconferencing capabilities may conduct their pre-bidding conferences
electronically. The Pre-Bid Conference is open to prospective bidders, and in case of
procurement of consulting services, the shortlisted bidder, but attendance shall not
be mandatory. (a)
22.4 The minutes of the pre-bid conference shall be recorded and prepared not later than
five (5) calendar days after the pre-bid conference, and shall be made available to
prospective bidders not later than five (5) days upon written request.41
(a)
Decisions of the BAC amending any provision of the Bidding Documents shall be
issued in writing through a Supplemental/Bid Bulletin at least seven (7) calendar
days before the deadline for the submission and receipt of bids. (a)
22.5 Supplemental/Bid Bulletins
22.5.1 Requests for clarification(s) on any part of the Bidding Documents or for
an interpretation must be in writing and submitted to the BAC of the
Procuring Entity concerned at least ten (10) calendar days before the
deadline set for the submission and receipt of bids. The BAC shall
respond to the said request by issuing a Supplemental/Bid Bulletin, duly
signed by the BAC Chairperson, to be made available to all those who
have properly secured the Bidding Documents, at least seven (7)
calendar days before the deadline for the submission and receipt of bids.
(a)
22.5.2 For purposes of clarifying or modifying any provision of the Bidding
Documents, Supplemental/Bid Bulletins may be issued upon the
Procuring Entity’s initiative at least seven (7) calendar days before the
deadline for the submission and receipt of bids. Any modification to the
Bidding Documents shall be identified as an amendment. (a)
22.5.3 Any Supplemental/Bid Bulletin issued by the BAC shall also be posted in
the PhilGEPS, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available,
and at any conspicuous place within the premises of the Procuring Entity.
It shall be the responsibility of all those who have properly secured the
41 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 04-2021, dated 4 March 2021, published in the Philippine Star on 15 March 2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
41
Bidding Documents to inquire and secure Supplemental/Bid Bulletins that
may be issued by the BAC. However, bidders who have submitted bids
before the issuance of the Supplemental/Bid Bulletin must be informed
and allowed to modify or withdraw their bids in accordance with Section
26 of this IRR. (a)
RULE VIII – RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS
Section 23. Eligibility Requirements for the Procurement of Goods and
Infrastructure Projects
23.1 For purposes of determining the eligibility of bidders using the criteria stated in
Section 23.4 of this IRR, only the following documents shall be required by the
BAC, using the forms prescribed in the Bidding Documents:
a) Class “A” Documents
Legal Documents
i) Registration certificate from SEC, Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)
for sole proprietorship, or CDA for cooperatives.
ii) Mayor’s/Business permit issued by the city or municipality where the
principal place of business of the prospective bidder is located, or the
equivalent document for Exclusive Economic Zones or Areas.
A recently expired Mayor’s/Business permit together with the official
receipt as proof that the prospective bidder has applied for renewal within
the period prescribed by the concerned local government unit, shall be
accepted by the PhilGEPS for the purpose of updating the PhilGEPS
Certificate of Registration and Membership in accordance with Section
8.5.2 of this IRR.42
iii) Tax clearance per E.O. 398, s. 2005, as finally reviewed and approved by
the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR).
Technical Documents
iv) Statement of the bidder of all its ongoing government and private
contracts, including contracts awarded but not yet started, if any, whether
similar or not similar in nature and complexity to the contract to be bid.
v) Statement of the bidder’s Single Largest Completed Contract (SLCC)
similar to the contract to be bid, except under conditions provided for in
Sections 23.4.1.3 and 23.4.2.4 of this IRR, within the relevant period as
provided in the Bidding Documents in the case of Goods.
42 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
42
All of the above statements shall include all information required in the
PBDs prescribed by the GPPB.
vi) In the case of procurement of Infrastructure Projects, a valid Philippine
Contractors Accreditation Board (PCAB) License or Special PCAB License
in case of Joint Ventures, and registration for the type and cost of the
contract to be bid.
Financial Documents
vii) The bidder’s audited financial statements, showing, among others, the
bidder’s total and current assets and liabilities, stamped “received” by the
BIR or its duly accredited and authorized institutions, for the preceding
calendar year which should not be earlier than two (2) years from the
date of bid submission.(a)
viii) The bidder’s computation of Net Financial Contracting Capacity (NFCC).
However, in the case of procurement of Goods, a bidder may submit a
committed Line of Credit from a Universal or Commercial Bank, in lieu of
its NFCC computation. (a)
b) Class “B” Document
For Goods, valid joint venture agreement (JVA), in case the joint venture is
already in existence. In the absence of a JVA, duly notarized statements from
all the potential joint venture partners should be included in the bid, stating
that they will enter into and abide by the provisions of the JVA in the event that
the bid is successful. Failure to enter into a joint venture in the event of a
contract award shall be ground for the forfeiture of the bid security.
For Infrastructure Projects, JV bidders shall submit a JVA in accordance with
R.A. 4566 and its IRR.
Each partner of the joint venture shall submit their respective PhilGEPS
Certificates of Registration in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. The
submission of technical and financial eligibility documents by any of the joint
venture partners constitutes compliance: Provided, That the partner responsible
to submit the NFCC shall likewise submit the Statement of all of its ongoing
contracts and Audited Financial Statements. (a)
23.2 In case of foreign bidders, the eligibility requirements or statements, the bids,
and all other documents to be submitted to the BAC must be in English. If the
eligibility requirements or statements, the bids, and all other documents
submitted to the BAC are in foreign language other than English, it must be
accompanied by a translation of the documents in English. The documents shall
be translated by the relevant foreign government agency, the foreign
government agency authorized to translate documents, or a registered translator
in the foreign bidder’s country; and shall be authenticated by the appropriate
Philippine foreign service establishment/post or the equivalent office having
jurisdiction over the foreign bidder’s affairs in the Philippines.(a)
However, for Contracting Parties to the Apostille Convention, the documents shall
be authenticated through an apostille by the Competent Authority, as defined in
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
43
Section 8.5.2 paragraph 4 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184, except for
countries43 identified by the DFA that will still require legalization (red ribbon) by
the relevant Embassy or Consulate. (n)44
23.3 To facilitate determination of eligibility, the BAC of a Procuring Entity shall use the
contents of the PhilGEPS electronic registry of manufacturers, suppliers,
distributors, contractors, and/or consultants, in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of
this IRR. (23.4a)
In lieu of the Class “A” eligibility documents mentioned under Section 8.5.2 of this
IRR, the Bidder shall only submit a valid and updated PhilGEPS Certificate of
Registration and Membership in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR for
purposes of determining eligibility.45
23.4 Eligibility Criteria
23.4.1 For the procurement of Goods:
23.4.1.1 The following shall be eligible to participate in the bidding for
the supply of goods:
a) Duly licensed Filipino citizens/sole proprietorships;
b) Partnerships duly organized under the laws of the
Philippines and of which at least sixty percent (60%) of the
interest belongs to citizens of the Philippines;
c) Corporations duly organized under the laws of the
Philippines, and of which at least sixty percent (60%) of
the outstanding capital stock belongs to citizens of the
Philippines;
d) Cooperatives duly organized under the laws of the
Philippines; or
e) Persons/entities forming themselves into a joint venture,
i.e., a group of two (2) or more persons/entities that
intend to be jointly and severally responsible or liable for a
particular contract: Provided, however, That Filipino
ownership or interest of the joint venture concerned shall
be at least sixty percent (60%). For this purpose, Filipino
ownership or interest shall be based on the contributions
of each of the members of the joint venture as specified in
their JVA. (23.5.1.1a)
43 As of 14 May 2019, Austria, Finland, Germany and Greece.
44 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 13-2019, dated 23 May 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
45 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
44
23.4.1.2 Foreign bidders may be eligible to participate under any of the
following circumstances in accordance with the guidelines46
issued by the GPPB:
a) When provided for under any Treaty or International or
Executive Agreement as provided in Section 4 of the Act
and this IRR;
b) When the foreign supplier is a citizen, corporation or
association of a country, the laws or regulations of which
grant reciprocal rights or privileges to citizens, corporations
or associations of the Philippines;
c) When the goods sought to be procured are not available
from local suppliers; or
d) When there is a need to prevent situations that defeat
competition or restrain trade. (23.5.1.2a)
23.4.1.3 The bidder must have completed, within the period specified in
the Invitation to Bid, an SLCC that is similar to the contract to
be bid, and whose value, adjusted to current prices using the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) consumer price indices,
must be at least fifty percent (50%) of the ABC. However, in
the case of Expendable Supplies, said SLCC must be at least
twenty five percent (25%) of the ABC.
If, at the outset and after conducting market research, the
Procuring Entity can already determine that imposing the same
will likely result to: (a) failure of bidding, or (b) monopoly that
will defeat the purpose of competitive bidding, the Procuring
Entity, in lieu of the above, may require the following:
a) The bidder should have completed at least two (2) similar
contracts and the aggregate contract amounts should be
equivalent to at least the percentage of the ABC as
required above; and
b) The largest of these similar contracts must be equivalent
to at least half of the percentage of the ABC as required
above.
For this purpose, the similar contracts mentioned under (a) and
(b) above must have been completed within the period
specified in the Invitation to Bid. The Procuring Entity may
clarify in the Bidding Documents the definition or description of
what it considers to be a similar project. (23.5.1.3a)
23.4.1.4 The computation of a bidder’s NFCC must be at least equal to
the ABC to be bid, calculated as follows:
46 Refer to Appendix 9 for the Guidelines in the Determination of Eligibility of Foreign Suppliers, Contractors, and Consultants to
Participate in Government Procurement Projects.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
50 Ibid.
61
NFCC = [(Current assets minus current liabilities) (15)] minus
the value of all outstanding or uncompleted portions of the
projects under ongoing contracts, including awarded contracts
yet to be started, coinciding with the contract to be bid.
The values of the domestic bidder’s current assets and current
liabilities shall be based on the latest Audited Financial
Statements submitted to the BIR.
For purposes of computing the foreign bidders' NFCC, the value
of the current assets and current liabilities shall be based on
their Audited Financial Statements prepared in accordance with
international financial reporting standards. (23.5.1.4a)
23.4.1.5 If the bidder submits a committed Line of Credit, it must be at
least equal to ten percent (10%) of the ABC to be bid:
Provided, That if the same is issued by a foreign Universal or
Commercial Bank, it shall be confirmed or authenticated by a
local Universal or Commercial Bank. (n)
23.4.2 For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects:
23.4.2.1 The following persons/entities shall be allowed to participate in
the bidding for Infrastructure Projects:
a) Duly licensed Filipino citizens/sole proprietorships;
b) Partnerships duly organized under the laws of the
Philippines and of which at least sixty percent (60%) of the
interest belongs to citizens of the Philippines;(a)47
c) Corporations duly organized under the laws of the
Philippines, and of which at least sixty percent (60%) of
the outstanding capital stock belongs to citizens of the
Philippines;(a)48
d) Cooperatives duly organized under the laws of the
Philippines; or
e) Persons/entities forming themselves into a joint venture,
i.e., a group of two (2) or more persons/entities that
intend to be jointly and severally responsible or liable for a
particular contract: Provided, however, That in accordance
with Executive Order No. 65 (EO 65), s. 2018,49 Filipino
ownership or interest of the joint venture concerned shall
be at least sixty percent (60%):50 Provided, further, That
joint ventures in which Filipino ownership or interest is less
than sixty percent (60%) may be eligible where the
structures to be built require the application of techniques
47 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2019, dated 8 March 2019, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 17 May
2019.
48 Ibid.
49 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
51 Ibid.
62
and/or technologies which are not adequately possessed
by a person/entity meeting the sixty percent (60%)51
Filipino ownership requirement: Provided, finally, That in
the latter case, Filipino ownership or interest shall not be
less than twenty-five percent (25%). For this purpose,
Filipino ownership or interest shall be based on the
contributions of each of the members of the joint venture
as specified in their JVA. (23.5.2.1a)(a)
23.4.2.2 Foreign bidders may be eligible to participate in the
procurement of Infrastructure Projects when provided for
under any Treaty or International or Executive Agreement as
provided in Section 4 of the Act and this IRR. (23.5.2.2)
23.4.2.3 In accordance with R.A. 4566, entitled “An Act Creating the
Philippine Licensing Board for Contractors, Prescribing its
Powers, Duties and Functions, Providing Funds Therefor, and
for Other Purposes,” the persons/entities enumerated in
Section 23.4.2.1 of this IRR may participate in competitive
bidding if he has been issued a license by the PCAB to engage
or act as a contractor.(23.5.2.3a)
23.4.2.4 The bidder must have completed an SLCC that is similar to the
contract to be bid, and whose value, adjusted to current prices
using the PSA consumer price indices, must be at least fifty
percent (50%) of the ABC to be bid: Provided, however, That
contractors under Small A and Small B categories without
similar experience on the contract to be bid may be allowed to
bid if the cost of such contract is not more than the Allowable
Range of Contract Cost (ARCC) of their registration based on
the guidelines as prescribed by the PCAB.
For Foreign-funded Procurement, the GoP and the foreign
government/foreign or international financing institution may
agree on another track record requirement.
Moreover, a contract shall be considered “similar” to the
contract to be bid if it has the same major categories of work.
The Procuring Entity may clarify in the Bidding Documents
what is regarded as major categories of work. (23.5.2.5a)
23.4.2.5 The SLCC shall be supported by an Owner’s Certificate of Final
Acceptance issued by the project owner other than the
contractor or a final rating of at least Satisfactory in the
Constructors Performance Evaluation System (CPES). In case of
contracts with the private sector, an equivalent document shall
be submitted. (23.5.2.4a)
23.4.2.6 The computation of a bidder’s NFCC must be at least equal to
the ABC to be bid, calculated as follows:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
63
NFCC = [(Current assets minus current liabilities) (15)] minus
the value of all outstanding or uncompleted portions of the
projects under ongoing contracts, including awarded contracts
yet to be started, coinciding with the contract to be bid.
The values of the domestic bidder’s current assets and current
liabilities shall be based on the latest Audited Financial
Statements submitted to the BIR.
For purposes of computing the foreign bidders' NFCC, the value
of the current assets and current liabilities shall be based on
their Audited Financial Statements prepared in accordance with
international financial reporting standards. (23.5.2.6a)
23.5 GOCCs may be eligible to participate in Competitive Bidding only if they can
establish that they (a) are legally and financially autonomous, (b) operate under
commercial law, and (c) are not attached agencies of the Procuring Entity. The
GPPB shall promulgate the necessary guidelines for this provision. (23.6)
23.6 Notwithstanding the eligibility of a bidder, the Procuring Entity concerned reserves
the right to review the qualifications of the bidder at any stage of the procurement
process if the Procuring Entity has reasonable grounds to believe that a
misrepresentation has been made by the said bidder, or that there has been a
change in the bidder’s capability to undertake the project from the time it submitted
its eligibility requirements. Should such review uncover any misrepresentation made
in the eligibility requirements, statements or documents, or any changes in the
situation of the bidder which will affect the capability of the bidder to undertake the
project so that it fails the eligibility criteria, the Procuring Entity shall consider the
said bidder as ineligible and shall disqualify it from obtaining an award or contract,
in accordance with Rules XXI, XXII, and XXIII of this IRR.(23.7a)
Section 24. Eligibility Requirements and Short Listing for Consulting Services
24.1 For purposes of determining the eligibility and short list of bidders in accordance with
Sections 24.4 and 24.5 of this IRR, only the following documents shall be required by
the BAC, using the forms prescribed in the Bidding Documents:
a) Class “A” Documents
Legal Documents
i) Registration certificate from SEC, DTI for sole proprietorship, or CDA for
cooperatives.
ii) Mayor’s/Business permit issued by the city or municipality where the
principal place of business of the bidder is located, or the equivalent
document for Exclusive Economic Zones or Areas.
A recently expired Mayor’s permit, together with the official receipt as
proof that the prospective bidder has applied for renewal within the
period prescribed by the concerned local government unit shall be
accepted by the PhilGEPs for the purpose of updating the PhilGEPs
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
64
Certificate of Registration and Membership in accordance with Section
8.5.2 of this IRR.52
For individual consultants not registered under a sole proprietorship, a
BIR Certificate of Registration shall be submitted, in lieu of DTI
registration and Mayor’s/Business permit.
iii) Tax clearance per E.O. 398, s. 2005, as finally reviewed and approved by
the BIR.
Technical Documents
iv) Statement of the bidder of all its ongoing and completed government
and private contracts, including contracts awarded but not yet started, if
any, whether similar or not similar in nature and complexity to the
contract to be bid, within the relevant period as provided in the Bidding
Documents. The statement shall include all information required in the
PBDs prescribed by the GPPB.(a)
v) Statement of the consultant specifying its nationality and confirming that
those who will actually perform the service are registered professionals
authorized by the appropriate regulatory body to practice those
professions and allied professions, including their respective curriculum
vitae.
Financial Document
vi) The consultant’s audited financial statements, showing, among others,
the consultant’s total and current assets and liabilities, stamped
“received” by the BIR or its duly accredited and authorized institutions, for
the preceding calendar year which should not be earlier than two (2)
years from the date of bid submission.
b) Class “B” Document
Valid joint venture agreement (JVA), in case a joint venture is already in
existence. In the absence of a JVA, duly notarized statements from all the
potential joint venture partners stating that they will enter into and abide by
the provisions of the JVA in the instance that the bid is successful, shall be
included in the bid. Failure to enter into a joint venture in the event of a
contract award shall be ground for the forfeiture of the bid security. Each
partner of the joint venture shall submit the PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration
in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. The submission of technical and
financial documents by any of the joint venture partners constitutes
compliance. (a)
24.2 In the case of foreign consultants, the eligibility requirements or statements, the
bids, and all other documents to be submitted to the BAC must be in English. If the
eligibility requirements or statements, the bids, and all other documents submitted to
the BAC are in foreign language other than English, it must be accompanied by a
52 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
65
. (n)
translation of the documents in English. The documents shall be translated by the
relevant foreign government agency, the foreign government agency authorized to
translate documents, or a registered translator in the foreign bidder’s country; and
shall be authenticated by the appropriate Philippine foreign service
establishment/post or the equivalent office having jurisdiction over the foreign
bidder’s affairs in the Philippines.(a)
However, for Contracting Parties to the Apostille Convention, the documents shall be
authenticated through an apostille by the Competent Authority, as defined in Section
8.5.2 paragraph 4 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184, except for countries53
identified by the DFA that will still require legalization (red ribbon) by the relevant
Embassy or Consulate 54
24.3 Eligibility Criteria
24.3.1 The following persons/entities shall be allowed to participate in the
bidding for Consulting Services:
a) Duly licensed Filipino citizens/sole proprietorships;
b) Partnerships duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and of
which at least sixty percent (60%) of the interest belongs to
citizens of the Philippines;
c) Corporations duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and
of which at least sixty percent (60%) of the outstanding capital
stock belongs to citizens of the Philippines;
d) Cooperatives duly organized under the laws of the Philippines; or
e) Persons/entities forming themselves into a joint venture, i.e., a
group of two (2) or more persons/entities that intend to be jointly
and severally responsible or liable for a particular contract:
Provided, however, That Filipino ownership or interest thereof shall
be at least sixty percent (60%). For this purpose, Filipino ownership
or interest shall be based on the contributions of each of the
members of the joint venture as specified in their JVA.
24.3.2 When the types and fields of consulting services in which the foregoing
persons/entities wish to engage involve the practice of professions
regulated by law, those who will actually perform the services shall be
Filipino citizens and registered professionals authorized by the
appropriate regulatory body to practice those professions and allied
professions.
24.3.3 In order to manifest trust and confidence in and promote the
development of Filipino consultancy, foreign consultants may be hired in
the event Filipino consultants do not have the sufficient expertise and
capability to render the services required under the project, as
determined by the HoPE subject to the submission of the documents in
accordance with Section 37.1.4(a)(iii).(a)
53 As of 14 May 2019, Austria, Finland, Germany and Greece.
54 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 13-2019, dated 23 May 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
66
24.4 Eligibility Check of Prospective Bidders
24.4.1 The eligibility envelopes of prospective bidders for procurement of
Consulting Services shall be submitted on or before the deadline specified
in the Request for Expression of Interest, and shall be opened before the
dates of the pre-bid conference and bid opening to determine eligibility of
prospective bidders. (a)
24.4.2 Subject to the short listing of consultants as provided in this IRR, the
determination of eligibility of consultants shall be based on the evaluation
of the eligibility documents prescribed above in accordance with the
procedures provided in Section 30.1 of this IRR.
24.4.3 To facilitate determination of eligibility, the BAC of a Procuring Entity shall
use the contents of the PhilGEPS electronic registry of manufacturers,
suppliers, distributors, contractors, and/or consultants, in accordance
with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. For procurement to be performed
overseas, it shall be subject to the Guidelines to be issued by the GPPB. (a)
In lieu of the Class “A” eligibility documents mentioned under Section 8.5.2 of this
IRR, the Bidder shall only submit a valid and updated PhilGEPS Certificate of
Registration and Membership in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR for
purposes of determining eligibility.
55
24.4.4 Should there be any change in the original Bidding Documents prior to
the conduct of eligibility checking and shortlisting, the BAC shall issue
supplemental/bid bulletin for such purpose at least seven (7) calendar
days before the deadline for the submission of eligibility documents,
subject to the provisions of Section 22.5.3 of this IRR.(n)
24.5 Short Listing of Prospective Bidders
24.5.1 With respect to a particular contract for Consulting Services to be bid, the
concerned Procuring Entity shall only consider for short listing those
consultants whose contracts, as identified in the eligibility documents
submitted for registration, are similar in nature and complexity to the
contract to be bid, based on the Request for Expression of Interest.
24.5.2 The BAC shall draw up the short list of consultants from those who have
been determined as eligible in accordance with the provisions of this IRR.
The number of short listed consultants, which shall be determined in the
pre-procurement conference, shall consist of three (3) to seven (7)
consultants, with five (5) as the preferable number. Should only one (1)
or less than the required number apply for eligibility and short listing,
pass the eligibility check, and/or pass the minimum score required in the
short listing, the BAC shall consider the same. The shortlisted bidders
shall then be required to pay the fee for the Bidding Documents, if
applicable, subject to the provisions of Section 17.4 of this IRR. (a)
55 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
67
24.5.3 The BAC shall specify in the Request for Expression of Interest the set of
criteria and rating system for short listing of consultants to be used for
the particular contract to be bid, which shall consider the following,
among others:
a) Applicable experience of the consultant and members in case of
joint ventures, considering both the overall experiences of the firm
or, in the case of new firms, the individual experiences of the
principal and key staff, including the times when employed by other
consultants;
b) Qualification of personnel who may be assigned to the job vis-à-vis
extent and complexity of the undertaking; and
c) Current workload relative to capacity.
24.5.4 The BAC shall recommend the short list of consultants to the HoPE for
consideration and approval. The entire process of eligibility check and
short listing shall not exceed twenty (20) calendar days.
24.6 GOCCs may be eligible to participate in Competitive Bidding only if they can
establish that they (a) are legally and financially autonomous, (b) operate under
commercial law, and (c) are not attached agencies of the Procuring Entity. The
GPPB shall promulgate the necessary guidelines for this provision.
24.7 Notwithstanding the eligibility of a consultant and/or inclusion in the short list of
consultants, the Procuring Entity concerned reserves the right to review his
qualifications at any stage of the procurement process if it has reasonable grounds
to believe that a misrepresentation has been made by the said consultant, or that
there has been a change in the consultant’s capability to undertake the project from
the time he submitted his eligibility requirements. Should such review uncover any
misrepresentation made in the eligibility requirements, statements or documents, or
any changes in the situation of the consultant which will affect the capability of the
consultant to undertake the project so that the consultant fails the preset eligibility
criteria, the Procuring Entity shall consider the said consultant as ineligible and shall
disqualify him from submitting a bid or from obtaining an award or contract, in
accordance with Rules XXI, XXII, and XXIII of this IRR.
Section 25. Submission and Receipt of Bids
25.1 Bidders shall submit their bids through their duly authorized representative using the
forms specified in the Bidding Documents in two (2) separate sealed bid envelopes,
or two (2) password-protected Bidding Documents in compressed archive folders, in
case of electronic bid submission,56 and which shall be submitted simultaneously.
The first shall contain the technical component of the bid, including the eligibility
requirements under Section 23.1 of this IRR for the procurement of Goods and
Infrastructure Projects, and the second shall contain the financial component of the
bid.(a)
25.2 The first envelope shall contain the following technical information/documents, at the
least:
56 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
68
(a)
a) For the procurement of Goods:
i) PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration and membership in accordance with
Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. For procurement to be performed overseas, it
shall be subject to the Guidelines to be issued by the GPPB.(a)
ii) Statement of all Ongoing Government and Private Contracts;
iii) Statement of SLCC;
iv) NFCC Computation or committed Line of Credit;
v) JVA or the Duly Notarized Statement in accordance with Section 23.1(b)
of this IRR, if applicable;
vi) Bid security in the prescribed form, amount and validity period;
vii) Technical Specifications, which may include production/delivery schedule,
manpower requirements, and/or after-sales service/parts, if applicable;
viii)Omnibus Sworn Statement in accordance with Section 25.3 of this IRR;
and
ix) For foreign bidders claiming eligibility by reason of their country’s
extension of reciprocal rights to Filipinos, a certification from the relevant
government office of their country stating that Filipinos are allowed to
participate in their government procurement activities for the same item
or product.
b) For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects:
i) PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration and membership in accordance with
Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. For procurement to be performed overseas, it
shall be subject to the Guidelines to be issued by the GPPB. (a)
ii) PCAB License and Registration, in case of JV; 57
iii) Statement of all Ongoing Government and Private Contracts;
iv) Statement of SLCC;
v) NFCC Computation;
vi) JVA, if applicable;
vii) Bid security in the prescribed form, amount and validity period;
viii) Project Requirements, which shall include the following:
(1) Organizational chart for the contract to be bid;
57 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 21-2017, dated 30 May 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20 November
2017.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
69
(2) List of contractor’s personnel (e.g., Project Manager, Project
Engineers, Materials Engineers, and Foremen), to be assigned to the
contract to be bid, with their complete qualification and experience
data;
(3) List of contractor’s major equipment units, which are owned, leased,
and/or under purchase agreements, supported by proof of ownership
or certification of availability of equipment from the equipment
lessor/vendor for the duration of the project, as the case may be; and
ix) Omnibus Sworn Statement in accordance with Section 25.3 of this IRR;
c) For the procurement of Consulting Services:
i) The bid security in the prescribed form, amount and validity period;
ii) Organizational chart for the contract to be bid;
iii) List of completed and ongoing projects;
iv) Approach, work plan, and schedule: Provided, however, That for
architectural design, submission of architectural plans and designs shall
not be required during the consultant’s selection process;
v) List of key personnel to be assigned to the contract to be bid, with their
complete qualification and experience data; and
vi) Omnibus Sworn Statement in accordance with Section 25.3 of this IRR.(a)
25.3 The Omnibus Sworn Statement executed by the bidder, or its duly authorized
representative, shall contain the following:
(a) The signatory is the duly authorized representative of the prospective bidder,
and granted full power and authority to do, execute and perform any and all
acts necessary to participate, submit the bid, and to sign and execute the
ensuing contract accompanied by the duly notarized Special Power of Attorney,
Board/Partnership Resolution, or Secretary’s Certificate, whichever is
applicable;
(b) It is not “blacklisted” or barred from bidding by the GoP or any of its agencies,
offices, corporations, or LGUs, including foreign government/foreign or
international financing institution whose blacklisting rules have been recognized
by the GPPB; by itself or by relation, membership, association, affiliation, or
controlling interest with another blacklisted person or entity as defined and
provided for in the Uniform Guidelines on Blacklisting;58
(a)
(c) Each of the documents submitted in satisfaction of the bidding requirements is
an authentic copy of the original, complete, and all statements and information
provided therein are true and correct;
(d) It is authorizing the HoPE or his duly authorized representative/s to verify all
the documents submitted;
58 As amended by GPPB Resolution 16-2020, dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
70
(e) It complies with the disclosure provision under Section 47 of the Act and this
IRR, in relation to other provisions of R.A. 3019;
(f) It complies with existing labor laws and standards;
(g) It complies with the responsibilities of a prospective or eligible bidder provided
in the PBDs;
(h) It did not give or pay, directly or indirectly, any commission, amount, fee, or
any form of consideration, pecuniary or otherwise, to any person or official,
personnel or representative of the government in relation to any procurement
project or activity; and [25.2(a)(iv), 25.2(b)(iv), 25.2(c)(iv)a]
(i) In case advance payment was made or given , failure to perform or deliver any
of the obligations and undertakings in the contract shall be sufficient grounds
to constitute criminal liability for swindling (estafa) or the commission of fraud
with unfaithfulness or abuse of confidence through misappropriating or
converting any payment received by a person or entity under an obligation
involving the duty to deliver certain goods or services, to the prejudice of the
public and the government of the Philippines pursuant to Article 315 of Act No.
3815 s. 1930, as amended, or the Revised Penal Code.59
(n)
25.4 The second envelope shall contain the financial information/documents as specified
in the PBDs.
25.5 Bids shall be received by the BAC on the date, time, and place specified in the
Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest. The following periods from the
last day of posting of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest up to
the submission and receipt of bids shall be observed:
a) For Goods, a maximum period of forty-five (45) calendar days.
b) For Infrastructure Projects, the following maximum periods:
ABC
(in Philippine currency) Period
Fifty (50) million and below 50 calendar days
Above fifty (50) million 65 calendar days
c) For Consulting Services, a maximum period of seventy-five (75) calendar days.
25.6 Bids, including the eligibility requirements under Section 23.1 of this IRR, submitted
after the deadline shall not be accepted by the BAC. The BAC shall record in the
minutes of bid submission and opening, the bidder’s name, its representative and
the time the late bid was submitted or in case of online or electronic bid
submission, generate a Bid receipt page for the official time of late submission
which can be saved or printed by the bidder.60
(a)
25.7 To ensure transparency and accurate representation of the bid submission, the BAC
Secretariat shall notify in writing all bidders whose bids it has received through its
59 Issued by GPPB Resolution No. 16-2020, dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
60 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
71
PhilGEPS-registered physical address or official e-mail address. The notice shall be
issued within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the bid opening. (n)
25.8 The original copy of the bid form shall be typed or written in ink and shall be signed
by the bidder or its duly authorized representative. (n)
25.9 Unsealed or unmarked bid envelopes, or in case of electronic bid submission,
Bidding Documents not in compressed archive folders and are not passwordprotected,61 shall be rejected. However, bid envelopes that are not properly sealed
and marked or not properly compressed and password-protected,62 as required in
the Bidding Documents, shall be accepted, provided that the bidder or its duly
authorized representative shall acknowledge such condition of the bid as submitted.
The BAC shall assume no responsibility for the misplacement of the contents of the
improperly sealed or marked bid, or improperly compressed or password-protected
folder,63 or for its premature opening. (n)
Section 26. Modification and Withdrawal of Bids
26.1 A bidder may modify its bid, provided that this is done before the deadline for the
submission and receipt of bids. For manual submission and receipt of bids,64 where
a bidder modifies its bid, it shall not be allowed to retrieve its original bid, but shall
only be allowed to send another bid equally sealed, properly identified, linked to its
original bid and marked as a “modification,” thereof, and stamped “received” by the
BAC. Bid modifications received after the applicable deadline shall not be considered
and shall be returned to the bidder unopened.(a)
For online or electronic bid submission, where a bidder modifies its Bid, it shall not
be allowed to retrieve its original Bid, but shall only be allowed to send another Bid
equally secured and properly identified. In the case of electronic submission, to be
labelled as a “modification,” of the one previously submitted. The time indicated in
the latest Bid receipt page generated shall be the official time of submission. Bids
submitted after the deadline shall not be accepted.65
(a)
26.2 A bidder may, through a letter, withdraw its bid before the deadline for the receipt of
bids. Withdrawal of bids after the applicable deadline shall be subject to appropriate
sanctions as prescribed in this IRR. A bidder may also express its intention not to
participate in the bidding through a letter which should reach and be stamped
received by the BAC before the deadline for the receipt of bids. A bidder that
withdraws its bid shall not be permitted to submit another bid, directly or indirectly,
for the same contract.
Section 27. Bid Security
27.1 All bids shall be accompanied by a bid security, payable to the Procuring Entity
concerned as a guarantee that the successful bidder shall, within ten (10) calendar
days from receipt of the notice of award, enter into contract with the Procuring Entity
and furnish the performance security required in Section 39 of this IRR, except when
Section 37.1 of this IRR allows a longer period. Failure to enclose the required bid
61 Ibid.
62 Ibid.
63 Ibid.
64 Ibid.
65 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
72
security in the form and amount prescribed herein shall automatically disqualify the
bid concerned.
27.2 The bidder shall submit a Bid Securing Declaration, or any form of Bid Security, in an
amount not less than the required percentage of the ABC in accordance with the
following schedule:(a)
Form of Bid Security
Amount of Bid Security
(Not less than the required
percentage of the ABC)
a) Cash or cashier’s/manager’s check issued by a
Universal or Commercial Bank.
For biddings conducted by LGUs, the
cashier’s/manager’s check may be issued by
other banks certified by the BSP as authorized
to issue such financial instrument. (a)
b) Bank draft/guarantee or irrevocable letter of
credit issued by a Universal or Commercial
Bank: Provided, however, That it shall be
confirmed or authenticated by a Universal or
Commercial Bank, if issued by a foreign bank.
Two percent (2%)
For biddings conducted by LGUs, bank
draft/guarantee, or irrevocable letter of credit
may be issued by other banks certified by the
BSP as authorized to issue such financial
instrument. (a)
c) Surety bond callable upon demand issued by a
surety or insurance company duly certified by
the Insurance Commission as authorized to
issue such security.
Five percent (5%)
27.3 The bid security shall be denominated in Philippine Pesos and posted in favor of the
Procuring Entity.
27.4 Without prejudice to the provisions of the Act and this IRR on the forfeiture of bid
securities, bid securities shall be returned only after the bidder with the Lowest
Calculated Responsive Bid (LCRB) or Highest Rated Responsive Bid (HRRB), as the
case may be, has signed the contract and furnished the performance security,
except to those declared by the BAC as failed or post-disqualified in accordance
with this IRR, upon submission of a written waiver of their right to file a request for
reconsideration and/or protest.
27.5 A Bid Securing Declaration is an undertaking which states, among others, that the
bidder shall enter into contract with the Procuring Entity and furnish the required
performance security within ten (10) calendar days, as indicated in the Bidding
Documents, from receipt of the Notice of Award, and commits to pay the
corresponding amount as fine and be automatically disqualified from bidding of any
procurement contract of any Procuring Entity for a period of time, upon receipt of
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
73
the Blacklisting Order,66 in the event it violates any of the conditions stated therein
as required in the guidelines67 issued by the GPPB.(a)
27.6 In no case shall the bid security be returned later than the expiration of the bid
validity period indicated in the Bidding Documents, unless it has been extended in
accordance with Section 28.2 of this IRR. (a)
Section 28. Bid Validity
28.1. Bids and bid securities shall be valid for a reasonable period as determined by the
HoPE concerned, which shall be indicated in the Bidding Documents, but in no case
shall the period exceed one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date of
the opening of bids.
28.2. Should it become necessary to extend the validity of the bids and bid securities
beyond one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, the Procuring Entity concerned
shall request in writing all those who submitted bids for such extension before the
expiration date therefor. Bidders, however, shall have the right to refuse to grant
such extension without forfeiting their bid security.
Section 29. Bid Opening
The BAC shall open the bids immediately after the deadline for the submission and receipt of
bids. The time, date, and place of the opening of bids shall be specified in the Bidding
Documents.
For electronic bid submission, the passwords for accessing the Bidding Documents will be
disclosed by the Bidders only during the actual bid opening which may be done in person or
face-to-face through videoconferencing, webcasting or similar technology.68
(a)
In case the bids cannot be opened as scheduled due to justifiable reasons, the BAC shall
take custody of the bids submitted and reschedule the opening of bids on the next working
day or at the soonest possible time through the issuance of a Notice of Postponement to be
posted in the PhilGEPS website and the website of the Procuring Entity concerned.
The bidders or their duly authorized representatives may attend the opening of bids. The
BAC shall ensure the integrity, security, and confidentiality of all submitted bids. The
abstract of bids as read and the minutes of the bid opening shall be made available to the
public upon written request and payment of a specified fee to recover cost of materials. (a)
RULE IX – BID EVALUATION
Section 30. Preliminary Examination of Bids
30.1 The BAC shall open the first bid envelopes in public to determine each bidder’s
compliance with the documents required to be submitted for eligibility and for the
technical requirements, as prescribed in this IRR. For this purpose, the BAC shall
66 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 16-2020, dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
67 Refer to Appendix 10 for the Guidelines on the Use of Bid Securing Declaration, as amended by GPPB Resolution No. 16-
2020,dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
68 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
74
check the submitted documents of each bidder against a checklist of required
documents to ascertain if they are all present, using a non-discretionary “pass/fail”
criterion, as stated in the Instructions to Bidders. If a bidder submits the required
document, it shall be rated “passed” for that particular requirement. In this regard,
bids that fail to include any requirement or are incomplete or patently insufficient
shall be considered as “failed.” Otherwise, the BAC shall rate the said first bid
envelope as “passed.” (a)
Receipt of the scanned copies of the first bid envelope with the required forms
prescribed in this IRR, which are for online or electronic bid submission, shall be
considered as compliant with the requirements of the said bid submission, subject to
the submission of the original copies of the following:
i) bid securing declaration or other forms of bid security excluding cash, and
ii) the omnibus sworn statement.
These forms shall be submitted by the bidder to and duly received by the BAC
concerned during the post-qualification stage.
The non-submission of these forms on the set period shall render the bid submission
as non-compliant and shall result in the post-disqualification of the bid.69
30.2 Immediately after determining compliance with the requirements in the first
envelope, the BAC shall forthwith open the second bid envelope of each remaining
eligible bidder whose first bid envelope was rated “passed.” The second envelope of
each complying bidder shall be opened within the same day, except as provided
under Section 33 of this IRR. In case any of the requirements in the second envelope
of a particular bid is missing, incomplete or patently insufficient, and/or if the
submitted total bid price exceeds the ABC, the BAC shall rate the bid concerned as
“failed.” Only bids that are determined to contain all the bid requirements for both
components shall be rated “passed” and shall immediately be considered for
evaluation and comparison. (a)
Receipt of the scanned copies of the second bid envelope with the required forms
such as the duly-signed bid form, price schedules, or other forms prescribed in this
IRR, for electronic or online bid submission, shall be considered as compliant with
the requirements of the said bid submission.70
30.3 For the procurement of Goods where, due to the nature of the requirements of the
project, the required technical specifications/requirements of the contract cannot be
precisely defined in advance of bidding, or where the problem of technically unequal
bids is likely to occur, a two (2)-stage bidding procedure may be employed. In these
cases, the Procuring Entity concerned shall prepare the Bidding Documents, including
the technical specification in the form of performance criteria only. Under this
procedure, prospective bidders shall be requested at the first stage to submit their
respective eligibility requirements if needed, and initial technical proposals only (no
price tenders). The concerned BAC shall then evaluate the technical merits of the
proposals received from eligible bidders vis-à-vis the required performance
standards. A meeting/discussion shall then be held by the BAC with those eligible
bidders whose technical tenders meet the minimum required standards stipulated in
the Bidding Documents for purposes of drawing up the final revised technical
69 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 16-2020, dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
70 Ibid
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
75
specifications/requirements of the contract. Once the final revised technical
specifications are completed and duly approved by the concerned BAC, copies of the
same shall be issued to all the bidders identified in the first stage who shall then be
required to submit their revised technical tenders, including their price proposals in
two (2) separate sealed envelopes in accordance with this IRR, at a specified
deadline, after which time no more bids shall be received. The concerned BAC shall
then proceed in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this IRR.
30.4 For the procurement of Consulting Services, the detailed implementation of the
procedure specified in this Section shall be as provided in Section 33 of this IRR.
Section 31. Ceiling for Bid Prices
31.1 The ABC shall be the upper limit or ceiling for acceptable bid prices. If a bid price, as
evaluated and calculated in accordance with this IRR, is higher than the ABC, the
bidder submitting the same shall be automatically disqualified. There shall be no
lower limit or floor on the amount of the award.
31.2 For Foreign-funded Procurement, the ABC shall be applied as the ceiling: Provided,
That the following conditions are met:
a) Bidding Documents are obtainable free of charge on a freely accessible website.
If payment of Bidding Documents is required by the Procuring Entity, payment
could be made upon the submission of bids.
b) The Procuring Entity has procedures in place to ensure that the ABC is based on
recent estimates made by the engineer or the responsible unit of the Procuring
Entity and that the estimates are based on adequate detailed engineering (in the
case of Infrastructure Projects) and reflect the quality, supervision and risk and
inflationary factors, as well as prevailing market prices, associated with the types
of Goods or Infrastructure Projects to be procured.
c) The Procuring Entity has trained cost estimators on estimating prices and
analyzing bid variances. In the case of Infrastructure Projects, the Procuring
Entity must also have trained quantity surveyors.
d) The Procuring Entity has established a system to monitor and report bid prices
relative to ABC and engineer’s/Procuring Entity’s estimate.
e) The Procuring Entity has established a monitoring and evaluation system for
contract implementation to provide a feedback on actual total costs of Goods and
Infrastructure Projects.
However, the GoP and the foreign government/foreign or international financing
institution may agree to waive the foregoing conditions. (a)
Section 32. Bid Evaluation for the Procurement of Goods and Infrastructure
Projects
32.1 Members of the BAC, its staff and personnel, Secretariat and TWG, as well as
Observers, are prohibited from making or accepting any communication with any
bidder regarding the evaluation of their bids until the issuance of the Notice of
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
76
Award. However, the BAC, through its Secretariat, may ask in writing the bidder for a
clarification of its bid. All responses to requests for clarification shall be in writing.(a)
32.2 For the procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects, the BAC shall evaluate the
financial component of the bids to determine the Lowest Calculated Bid using the
following steps:
32.2.1 The BAC shall immediately conduct a detailed evaluation of all bids using
non-discretionary criteria in considering the following:
a) Completeness of the bid. Unless the Instructions to Bidders
specifically allow partial bids, bids not addressing or providing all of
the required items in the Bidding Documents including, where
applicable, bill of quantities, shall be considered non-responsive
and, thus, automatically disqualified. In this regard, where a
required item is provided, but no price is indicated, the same shall
be considered as non-responsive, but specifying a zero (0) or a
dash (-) for the said item would mean that it is being offered for
free to the Government, except those required by law or
regulations to be provided for; and
b) Arithmetical corrections. Consider computational errors and
omissions to enable proper comparison of all eligible bids. It may
also consider bid modifications if expressly allowed in the Bidding
Documents. Any adjustment shall be calculated in monetary terms
to determine the calculated prices. (a)
32.2.2 The BAC shall evaluate all bids on an equal footing to ensure fair and
competitive bid comparison. For this purpose, all bidders shall be required
to include the cost of all taxes, such as, but not limited to, value added
tax (VAT), income tax, local taxes, and other fiscal levies and duties
which shall be itemized in the bid form and reflected in the detailed
estimates. Such bids, including said taxes, shall be the basis for bid
evaluation and comparison.
32.2.3 In case of discrepancies between: (a) bid prices in figures and in words,
the latter shall prevail; (b) total price per item and unit price for the item
as extended or multiplied by the quantity of that item, the latter shall
prevail; (c) stated total price and the actual sum of prices of component
items, the latter shall prevail; (d) unit cost in the detailed estimate and
unit cost in the bill of quantities, the latter shall prevail.
32.2.4 Bids shall then be ranked in the ascending order of their total calculated
bid prices, as evaluated and corrected for computational errors, and other
bid modifications, to identify the Lowest Calculated Bid. Total calculated
bid prices, as evaluated and corrected for computational errors, and other
bid modifications, which exceed the ABC shall be disqualified.
32.3 After all bids have been received, opened, examined, evaluated, and ranked, the
BAC shall prepare the corresponding Abstract of Bids. All members of the BAC shall
sign the Abstract of Bids and attach thereto all the bids with their corresponding bid
securities and the minutes or proceedings of the bidding. The Abstract of Bids shall
contain the following:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
77
a) Name of the contract and its location, if applicable;
b) Time, date and place of bid opening; and
c) Names of bidders and their corresponding calculated bid prices arranged from
lowest to highest, the amount of bid security and the name of the issuing
entity.
32.4 The entire evaluation process for the procurement of Goods and Infrastructure
Projects shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days from the deadline for
receipt of proposals. (a)
Section 33. Bid Evaluation of Short Listed Bidders for Consulting Services
33.1 From submission and receipt of bids until the approval by the HoPE of the ranking of
short listed bidders, those that have submitted their bids are prohibited from making
any communication with any BAC member, including its staff and personnel, as well
as its Secretariat and TWG, regarding matters connected to their bids. However, the
BAC, through its Secretariat, may ask in writing the bidder for a clarification of its
bid. All responses to requests for clarification shall be in writing.
33.2 The purpose of bid evaluation is to determine the Highest Rated Bid using the
following steps:
33.2.1 The BAC shall conduct a detailed evaluation of bids using either of the
following evaluation procedures as specified in the Bidding Documents:
33.2.1.1 Quality-Based Evaluation Procedure
i) A two-stage procedure shall be adopted whereby each consultant
shall be required to submit his technical and financial proposals
simultaneously in separate sealed envelopes.
ii) After receipt of bids, the technical proposals shall first be opened
and evaluated, in accordance with Section 33.2.2 of this IRR. The
BAC shall rank the consultants in descending order based on the
numerical ratings of their technical proposals and identify the
Highest Rated Bid: Provided, however, That the Highest Rated Bid
shall pass the minimum score indicated in the Bidding Documents.
iii) The HoPE shall approve or disapprove the recommendations of
the BAC within two (2) calendar days after receipt of the results of
the evaluation from the BAC.
iv) After approval by the HoPE of the Highest Rated Bid, its financial
proposal shall then be opened. The BAC shall, within three (3)
calendar days, notify and invite the consultant with the Highest
Rated Bid for the opening of financial proposal for the purpose of
conducting negotiations with the said consultant. In the letter of
notification, the BAC shall inform the consultant of the issues in
the technical proposal the BAC may wish to clarify during
negotiations.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
78
v) Negotiations shall be in accordance with Section 33.2.5 of this
IRR: Provided, That the amount indicated in the financial envelope
shall be made as the basis for negotiations and the total contract
amount shall not exceed the amount indicated in the envelope
and the ABC as stated in the Bidding Documents.
33.2.1.2 Quality-Cost Based Evaluation Procedure
i) The technical proposal together with the financial proposal shall
be considered in the evaluation of consultants. The technical
proposals shall be evaluated first using the criteria in Section
33.2.2 of this IRR. The financial proposals of the consultants who
meet the minimum technical score shall then be opened.
i) The financial and technical proposals shall be given corresponding
weights with the financial proposal given a minimum weight of
fifteen percent (15%) up to a maximum of forty percent (40%).
The weight of the technical criteria shall be adjusted accordingly
such that their total weight in percent together with the weight
given to the financial proposal shall add to one hundred percent
(100%). The exact weights shall be approved by the HoPE upon
the recommendation of the BAC and indicated in the Bidding
Documents. The BAC shall rank the consultants in descending
order based on the combined numerical ratings of their technical
and financial proposals and identify the Highest Rated Bid.
ii) The HoPE shall approve or disapprove the recommendations of
the BAC within two (2) calendar days after receipt of the results of
the evaluation from the BAC.
iii) After approval by the HoPE of the Highest Rated Bid, the BAC
shall, within three (3) calendar days, notify and invite the
consultant with the Highest Rated Bid for negotiation in
accordance with Section 33.2.5 of this IRR, except for the
financial proposal under item (e) thereof. (a)
33.2.2 The technical proposals of consultants shall be evaluated based on the
following criteria and using the corresponding numerical weights
indicated in the Bidding Documents:
a) Quality of personnel to be assigned to the project which covers
suitability of key staff to perform the duties of the particular
assignments and general qualifications and competence including
education and training of the key staff;
b) Experience and capability of the consultant which include records of
previous engagement and quality of performance in similar and in
other projects; relationship with previous and current clients; and,
overall work commitments, geographical distribution of
current/impending projects and attention to be given by the
consultant. The experience of the consultant to the project shall
consider both the overall experiences of the firm and the individual
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
79
experiences of the principal and key staff including the times when
employed by other consultants; and
c) Plan of approach and methodology with emphasis on the clarity,
feasibility, innovativeness and comprehensiveness of the plan
approach, and the quality of interpretation of project problems, risks,
and suggested solutions.
For complex or unique undertakings, such as those involving new
concepts/technology or financial advisory services, participating short
listed consultants may be required, at the option of the agency
concerned, to make an oral presentation to be presented by each
consultant, or its nominated Project Manager or head, in case of firms,
within fifteen (15) calendar days after the deadline for submission of
technical proposals.
33.2.3 In order to eliminate bias in evaluating the technical proposals, it is
recommended that the highest and lowest scores for each consultant for
each criterion shall not be considered in determining the average scores
of the consultants, except when the evaluation is conducted in a collegial
manner.
33.2.4 All participating short listed consultants shall be furnished the results
(ranking and total scores only) of the evaluation after the approval by the
HoPE of the ranking. Said results shall also be posted in the PhilGEPS and
the website of the Procuring Entity, whenever available, for a period of
not less than seven (7) calendar days.
33.2.5 Negotiations shall cover the following:
a) Discussion and clarification of the terms of reference and scope of
services;
b) Discussion and finalization of the methodology and work program
proposed by the consultant;
c) Consideration of appropriateness of qualifications and pertinent
compensation, number of man-months and the personnel to be
assigned to the job, taking note of over-qualified personnel, to be
commensurate with the compensation of personnel with the
appropriate qualifications, number of man-months and schedule of
activities (manning schedule);
d) Discussion on the services, facilities and data, if any, to be provided
by Procuring Entity concerned;
e) Discussion on the financial proposal submitted by the consultant; and
f) Provisions of the contract.
Except for meritorious reasons, negotiations with any one consultant shall
be completed within ten (10) calendar days.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
80
33.2.6 Total calculated bid prices, as evaluated and corrected for minor
arithmetical corrections, such as computational errors, which exceed the
ABC shall not be considered.
33.3 There should be no replacement of key personnel before the awarding of contract,
except for justifiable reason as may be determined by the BAC, such as, illness,
death, or resignation provided it is duly supported by relevant certificates, or any
delay caused by the Procuring Entity. The BAC shall immediately consider
negotiation with the next ranked consultant if unjustifiable replacement of
personnel by the first ranked firm is made. Once the contract has been awarded, no
replacement shall be allowed by the HoPE until after fifty percent (50%) of the
personnel’s man-months have been served, except for justifiable reasons, subject
to appropriate sanctions as prescribed in the PBDs. (a)
33.4 The entire evaluation process, including the submission of the results thereof to the
HoPE for approval, shall be completed in not more than twenty-one (21) calendar
days after the deadline for receipt of proposals. The proposal with the highest score
shall be identified as the Highest Rated Bid.
RULE X – POST-QUALIFICATION
Section 34. Objective and Process of Post-Qualification
34.1 The Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid shall undergo post-qualification in order
to determine whether the bidder concerned complies with and is responsive to all the
requirements and conditions as specified in the Bidding Documents.
34.2 Within five (5) calendar days from receipt by the bidder of the notice from the BAC
that the bidder has the Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid, the bidder shall
submit to the BAC its latest income and business tax returns, and other appropriate
licenses and permits required by law and stated in the Bidding Documents.
Failure to submit any of the post-qualification requirements on time, or a finding
against the veracity thereof, shall disqualify the bidder for award: Provided, That in
the event that a finding against the veracity of any of the documents submitted is
made, it shall cause the forfeiture of the Bid Security in accordance with Section 69
of this IRR.(a)
34.3 The post-qualification shall verify, validate and ascertain the veracity, authenticity
and validity of all the Class “A” eligibility documents supporting the PhilGEPS
Certificate of Registration and Membership in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this
IRR, and all the other statements made and documents submitted by the bidder with
the Lowest Calculated Bid/ Highest Rated Bid, using non-discretionary criteria, as
stated in the Bidding Documents.71 These criteria shall consider, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
71 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
81
a) Legal Requirements. To verify, validate, and ascertain licenses, certificates,
permits, and agreements submitted by the bidder, and the fact that it is not
included in any “blacklist” as provided in Section 25.3 of this IRR. For this
purpose, the GPPB shall maintain a consolidated file of all “blacklisted”
suppliers, contractors, and consultants.
b) Technical Requirements. To determine compliance of the goods,
infrastructure projects, or consulting services offered with the requirements
specified in the Bidding Documents, including, where applicable:
i) Verification and validation of the bidder’s stated competence and
experience, and the competence and experience of the bidder’s key
personnel to be assigned to the project, for the procurement of
Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services;
ii) Verification of availability and commitment, and/or inspection and testing
for the required capacities and operating conditions, of equipment units to
be owned/leased/under purchase by the bidder for use in the contract
under bidding, as well as checking the performance of the bidder in its
ongoing government and private contracts, if any of these ongoing
contracts shows:
a. Negative slippage of at least fifteen percent (15%) in any one
project or a negative slippage of at least ten percent (10%) in each
of two (2) or more contracts;
b. Failure of the contractor to commence repair works on ongoing
contracts within seven (7) calendar days and to complete them
within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the Procuring Entity's
notice of defects and deficiencies;
c. Failure of the contractor to commence repair works on contracts
with pending certificates of acceptance within thirty (30) calendar
days and complete them within ninety (90) days after receipt of the
Procuring Entity's notice of defects and failures; or
d. Substandard quality of work as per contract plans and specifications,
or unsatisfactory performance of the contractor’s obligations as per
contract terms and conditions, at the time of inspection.
If the BAC verifies any of these deficiencies to be due to the contractor’s
fault or negligence, the agency shall disqualify the contractor from the
award, for the procurement of Infrastructure Projects.
iii) Verification and/or inspection and testing of the goods/product, aftersales and/or maintenance capabilities, in applicable cases, as well as
checking the following:
a. Delay in the partial delivery of goods amounting to ten percent
(10%) of the contract price in its ongoing government and private
contracts;
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
82
b. If any of these contracts shows the bidder’s failure to deliver or
perform any or all of the goods or services within the period(s)
specified in the contract or within any extension thereof granted by
the Procuring Entity pursuant to a request made by the supplier
prior to the delay, and such failure amounts to at least ten percent
(10%) of the contract price; or
c. Unsatisfactory performance of the supplier’s obligations as per
contract terms and conditions at the time of inspection.
If the BAC verifies any of these deficiencies to be due to the bidder's fault
or negligence, the BAC shall disqualify the bidder from the award, for the
procurement of Goods.
iv) Ascertainment of the authenticity of the bid security and its correctness as
to type, amount, form and wording, and validity period, as required in the
Bidding Documents.
c) Financial Requirements. To verify, validate and ascertain the bid price
proposal of the bidder and, whenever applicable, the required committed Line
of Credit in the amount specified and over the period stipulated in the Bidding
Documents, or the bidder’s NFCC to ensure that the bidder can sustain the
operating cash flow of the transaction. (a)
34.4 If the BAC determines that the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated
Bid passes all the criteria for post-qualification, it shall declare the said bid as the
LCRB or HRRB72, and recommend to the HoPE the award of contract to the said
bidder at its submitted bid price or its calculated bid price, whichever is lower or, in
the case of quality-based evaluation procedure, submitted bid price or its
negotiated price, whichever is lower.
34.5 If, however, the BAC determines that the bidder with the Lowest Calculated
Bid/Highest Rated Bid fails the criteria for post-qualification, it shall immediately
notify the said bidder in writing of its post-disqualification and the grounds for it.
34.6 Immediately after the BAC has notified the first bidder of its post-disqualification,
and notwithstanding any pending request for reconsideration thereof, the BAC shall
initiate and complete the same post-qualification process on the bidder with the
second Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid. If the second bidder passes the
post-qualification, and provided that the request for reconsideration of the first
bidder has been denied, the second bidder shall be post-qualified as the bidder with
the LCRB or HRRB.
34.7 If the second bidder, however, fails the post-qualification, the procedure for postqualification shall be repeated for the bidder with the next Lowest Calculated
Bid/Highest Rated Bid, and so on until the LCRB or HRRB, as the case may be, is
determined for award, subject to Section 37 of this IRR.
34.8 The post-qualification process shall be completed in not more than twelve (12)
calendar days from the determination of the Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated
Bid. In exceptional cases, the post-qualification period may be extended by the
HoPE, but in no case shall the aggregate period exceed forty-five (45) calendar
72 In case of a tie among bidders, refer to Appendix 11 for the Tie-Breaking Method.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
83
days for Goods and Infrastructure Projects, or thirty (30) calendar days in
Consulting Services.
In case of post-disqualification of the bidder with the lowest calculated bid/highest
rated bid, the BAC shall be given the same fresh period to conduct the postqualification of the next lowest calculated bid/highest rated bid until a bidder is
post-qualified or failure of bidding is declared based on Section 35.1(c) of this
IRR.(a)
Section 35. Failure of Bidding
35.1 The BAC shall declare the bidding a failure when:
a) No bids are received;
b) All prospective bidders are declared ineligible;
c) All bids fail to comply with all the bid requirements or fail post-qualification, or,
in the case of Consulting Services, there is no successful negotiation; or
d) The bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB or SRRB refuses, without justifiable
cause, to accept the award of contract, and no award is made in accordance
with Section 40 of the Act and this IRR.
35.2 In order to determine the reason for the failed bidding, the BAC shall conduct a
mandatory review and evaluation of the terms, conditions, and specifications in the
Bidding Documents, including its cost estimates.
35.3 Based on its findings, the BAC shall revise the terms, conditions, and specifications,
and if necessary, adjust the ABC, subject to the required approvals, and conduct a
re-bidding with re-advertisement and/or posting, as provided for in Section 21.2 of
this IRR.
35.4 All bidders who have initially responded to the Invitation to Bid/Request for
Expression of Interest and have been declared eligible or short listed in the previous
biddings shall be allowed to submit new bids. The BAC shall observe the same
process and set the new periods according to the same rules followed during the
previous bidding(s).
35.5 Should there occur a second failure of bidding, the Procuring Entity may resort to
negotiated procurement as provided for in Section 53.1 of this IRR.
35.6 Without prejudice to Sec. 35.1 hereof, the BAC is authorized, upon consultation with
the end-user unit, to cancel or terminate the conduct of procurement activities, for
any justifiable reason, such as but not limited to:73
a) the physical and economic conditions have significantly changed so as to render
the project no longer economically, financially, or technically feasible, as
determined by the end-user unit;74
b) the project is no longer necessary as determined by the end-user unit;75
73 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
74 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
84
c) the source of funds for the project has been withheld or reduced through no
fault of the PE; or76
d) brought about by the declaration of a State of Calamity, or implementation of
community quarantine or similar restrictions.77
(n)
Section 36. Single Calculated/Rated and Responsive Bid Submission
A Single Calculated and Responsive Bid (SCRB) or a Single Rated and Responsive Bid (SRRB)
shall be considered for award if it falls under any of the following circumstances:
a) If after advertisement, only one prospective bidder applies for eligibility check, in
accordance with the provisions of this IRR, and it meets the eligibility requirements or
criteria, after which it submits a bid which is found to be responsive to the bidding
requirements;
b) If after advertisement, more than one prospective bidder applies for eligibility check, in
accordance with the provisions of this IRR, but only one bidder meets the eligibility
requirements or criteria, after which it submits a bid which is found to be responsive to
the bidding requirements; or
c) If after the eligibility check, more than one bidder meets the eligibility requirements,
but only one bidder submits a bid, and its bid is found to be responsive to the bidding
requirements.
In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the ABC reflects the most
advantageous prevailing price for the Government. (a)
RULE XI – AWARD, IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION OF THE CONTRACT
Section 37. Notice and Execution of Award
37.1 Contract Award
37.1.1 The BAC shall recommend to the HoPE the award of contract to the
bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB, or SRRB after the post-qualification
process has been completed.
To facilitate the approval of the award, the BAC shall submit the
following supporting documents to the HoPE:
a) Resolution of the BAC recommending award;
b) Abstract of Bids;
c) Duly approved program of work or delivery schedule, and Cost
Estimates;
75 Ibid.
76 Ibid.
77 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
85
d) Document issued by appropriate entity authorizing the Procuring Entity
to incur obligations for a specified amount; and
e) Other pertinent documents required by existing laws, rules, and/or the
Procuring Entity concerned.
Within three (3) calendar days from the issuance of the resolution
recommending award of the contract, the BAC shall notify all other
bidders, in writing, of its recommendation. (a)
37.1.2 Within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days from the
determination by the BAC of the bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB, or
SRRB, and the recommendation to award the contract, the HoPE or his
duly authorized representative shall approve or disapprove the said
recommendation. (a)
37.1.3 In case of approval, the HoPE shall immediately issue the Notice of
Award to the bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB or SRRB.
In the event of disapproval, which shall be based only on valid,
reasonable, and justifiable grounds as provided for under Section 41 of
this IRR, the HoPE shall notify the BAC and the bidder in writing of such
decision and the grounds for it.
When applicable, the BAC shall conduct a post-qualification of the bidder
with the next Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid, as provided in
Section 34.6 of this IRR.
A request for reconsideration may be filed by the bidder with the HoPE
within three (3) calendar days from receipt of the notice of disapproval.
The HoPE shall resolve with finality the request for reconsideration within
seven (7) calendar days from the filing thereof and furnish the bidder a
copy of the resolution immediately from its promulgation. In no case shall
the request for reconsideration stay or delay the bidding process.
However, the request for reconsideration must first be resolved before
any award is made. (a)
37.1.4 Within ten (10) days from receipt of by the winning bidder of the Notice
of Award, the following conditions should be complied before the contract
may be awarded:(a)
a) Submission of the following documents within ten (10) calendar
days from Notice of Award:
i) Valid JVA, if applicable;
ii) A valid PCAB license and registration for the type and cost
of the contract to be bid for foreign bidders in Infrastructure
Projects, when the Treaty or International or Executive
Agreement expressly allows submission of such license and
registration as a pre-condition to the Notice of Award; or(a)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
86
iii) The SEC Certificate of Registration of the foreign
corporation, or the SEC Certificate of Registration of the
foreign consulting firm, and/or the authority or license from
the appropriate government agency or professional regulatory
body of the foreign professionals engaging in the practice of
regulated professions and allied professions, where
applicable.78
(a)
b) Posting of performance security in accordance with Section 39 of
this IRR;
c) Signing of the contract as provided in Section 37.2 of this IRR; and
d) Approval by higher authority, if required, as provided in Section
37.3 of this IRR. (a)
37.1.5 Contract award shall be made within the bid validity period provided in
Section 28 of this IRR.
37.1.6 The BAC, through the Secretariat, shall post, within three (3) calendar
days from its issuance, the Notice of Award in the PhilGEPS, the website
of the Procuring Entity, if any, and any conspicuous place in the premises
of the Procuring Entity.
37.2 Contract Signing
37.2.1 The winning bidder shall post the required Performance Security and
enter into contract with the Procuring Entity within ten (10) calendar days
from receipt by the winning bidder of the Notice of Award.
37.2.2 The Procuring Entity shall enter into contract with the winning bidder
within the same ten (10) day period provided that all the documentary
requirements are complied with.
37.2.3 The following documents shall form part of the contract:
a) Contract Agreement;
b) Bidding Documents;
c) Winning bidder’s bid, including the Eligibility requirements, Technical
and Financial Proposals, and all other documents/statements
submitted;
d) Performance Security;
e) Notice of Award of Contract; and
f) Other contract documents that may be required by existing laws
and/or the Procuring Entity concerned in the Bidding Documents,
such as the construction schedule and S-curve, manpower schedule,
construction methods, equipment utilization schedule, construction
78 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 25-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
87
safety and health program approved by the Department of Labor and
Employment, and PERT/CPM or other acceptable tools of project
scheduling for infrastructure projects.(a)
37.3 Contract Approval by Higher Authority
When further approval of higher authority is required, the approving authority for
the contract or his duly authorized representative shall be given a maximum of
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt thereof to approve or disapprove it. In the
case of GOCCs, the concerned board or its duly authorized representative shall be
given a maximum of thirty (30) calendar days from receipt thereof to approve or
disapprove it. (a)
37.4 Notice to Proceed
37.4.1 The concerned Procuring Entity shall issue the Notice to Proceed together
with a copy or copies of the approved contract to the successful bidder
within seven (7) calendar days from the date of approval of the contract
by the appropriate government approving authority. All notices called for
by the terms of the contract shall be effective only at the time of receipt
thereof by the successful bidder. (a)
37.4.2 The Procuring Entity, through the BAC Secretariat, shall post a copy of
the Notice to Proceed and the approved contract in the PhilGEPS and the
website of the Procuring Entity, if any, within fifteen (15) calendar days
from the issuance of the Notice to Proceed.
Section 38. Period of Action on Procurement Activities
38.1 The procurement process from the opening of bids up to the award of contract shall
not exceed three (3) months, or a shorter period to be determined by the Procuring
Entity concerned. All members of the BAC shall be on a “jury duty” type of
assignment until the Notice of Award is issued by the HoPE in order to complete the
entire procurement process at the earliest possible time.
For purposes of this section, the term “jury duty” shall be understood to mean a
state by which the members give utmost priority to BAC assignment over all the
other duties and responsibilities until the requirements for the said assignments at
hand are completed.
38.2 The maximum periods and the recommended earliest possible time for action on
specific procurement activities are provided for in Annex “C”79 of this IRR. In case the
deadline for each activity falls on a non-working day (i.e. Saturday and Sunday),
legal holiday, or special non-working holiday, or other nonworking days duly declared
by the President, Governor, Mayor or other Government Official authorized to make
such declaration, the deadline shall be the next working day.80
(a)
However, for purposes of expediency, economy, and efficiency, as determined by the
BAC, specific procurement activities may be held on a Saturday, Sunday, nonworking
day or holiday: provided, that the BAC, secretariat and TWG members shall be
79 Recommended Earliest Possible Time and Maximum Period Allowed For the Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects,
and Consulting Services.
80 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 36-2017, dated 7 November 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 24 April
2018.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
88
available on such date, and the appropriate supplemental/bid bulletin is issued and
posted pursuant to the posting requirements embodied in section 22.5.3 of this
IRR.(n)81
38.3 If no action on the contract is taken by the HoPE or the appropriate approving
authority within the periods specified in this IRR, the contract concerned shall be
deemed approved: Provided, however, That where further approval by the Office of
the President is required, the contract shall not be deemed approved unless and until
the Office of the President gives actual approval to the contract concerned.
38.4 The period of action on procurement activities is tolled or suspended, as follows:82
a. For Early Procurement Activities, pending approval and effectivity of the GAA,
corporate budget or appropriations ordinance, or the loan agreement in the case
of FAPs; and83
b. During the suspension of the conduct of procurement activities, as determined
by the BAC.84
The period of action on procurement activities which has been tolled or suspended
shall begin to run again once the basis of such tolling or suspension no longer
exists, such as upon the approval and effectivity of the GAA, reenacted budget,
appropriations ordinance, corporate budget or loan agreement, as the case may be,
or upon lifting of the suspension of the conduct of procurement activities.85
The period of action on procurement activities shall not commence anew but rather,
grants the PE the balance of the remaining period available for the conduct of
procurement activities which has been tolled or suspended.86
(a)
Section 39. Performance Security
39.1 To guarantee the faithful performance by the winning bidder of its obligations under
the contract in accordance with the Bidding Documents, it shall post a performance
security prior to the signing of the contract.87
81 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 21-2017, dated 30 May 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20 November
2017.
82 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
83 Ibid.
84 Ibid.
85 Ibid.
86 Ibid.
87 During a State of Calamity, or Implementation of Community Quarantine or Similar Restrictions, GPPB Resolution No. 09-
2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020 provides that procuring entities are allowed
to accept:
xxx
6.4 Performance Securing Declaration (PSD) in lieu of a performance security to guarantee the winning bidder’s faithful
performance of obligations under the contract, subject to the following:
a. Similar to the PSD used in Framework Agreement, such declaration shall state, among others, that the winning
bidder shall be blacklisted from being qualified to participate in any government procurement activity for one (1)
year, in case of first offense or two (2) years, if with prior similar offense, in the event it violates any of the
conditions stated in the contract. A copyof the PSD form is attached hereto as Annex “A;”
b. An unnotarized PSD may be accepted, subject to submission of a notarized PSD before payment, unless the same
is replaced with a performance security in the prescribed form, as stated below; and
c. The end-user may require the winning bidder to replace the submitted PSD with a performance security in any of
the prescribed forms under Section 39.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184 upon lifting of the State of
Calamity, or community quarantine or similar restrictions, as the case may be.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
89
39.2 The performance security shall be in an amount not less than the required
percentage of the total contract price in accordance with the following schedule: (a)
Form of Performance Security
Amount of Performance
Security
(Not less than the required
percentage of the Total
Contract Price)
a) Cash or cashier’s/manager’s check issued by a
Universal or Commercial Bank.
For biddings conducted by LGUs, the
cashier’s/manager’s check may be issued by
other banks certified by the BSP as authorized
to issue such financial instrument. (a) Goods and Consulting Services –
Five percent (5%)
Infrastructure Projects – Ten
percent (10%)
b) Bank draft/guarantee or irrevocable letter of
credit issued by a Universal or Commercial
Bank: Provided, however, That it shall be
confirmed or authenticated by a Universal or
Commercial Bank, if issued by a foreign bank.
For biddings conducted by LGUs, bank
draft/guarantee, or irrevocable letter of credit
may be issued by other banks certified by the
BSP as authorized to issue such financial
instrument. (a)
c) Surety bond callable upon demand issued by a
surety or insurance company duly certified by
the Insurance Commission as authorized to
issue such security.
Thirty percent (30%)
39.3 The performance security shall be denominated in Philippine Pesos and posted in
favor of the Procuring Entity, which shall be forfeited in the event it is established
that the winning bidder is in default in any of its obligations under the contract.
39.4 The performance security shall remain valid until issuance by the Procuring Entity of
the Certificate of Final Acceptance.
39.5 The performance security may be released by the Procuring Entity after the
issuance of the Certificate of Final Acceptance, subject to the following conditions:
a) Procuring Entity has no claims filed against the contract awardee or the surety
company;
b) It has no claims for labor and materials filed against the contractor; and
c) Other terms of the contract. (a)
39.6 For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects, the winning bidder shall post an
additional performance security following the schedule above to cover any
cumulative increase of more than ten percent (10%) over the original value of the
contract as a result of amendments to order or change orders, extra work orders
and supplemental agreements, as the case may be. The winning bidder shall cause
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
90
the extension of the validity of the Performance Security to cover approved contract
time extensions.
39.7 In case of a reduction in the contract value, or, in the case of procurement of
Infrastructure Projects, for partially completed works under the contract which are
usable and accepted by the GoP, and the use of which, in the judgment of the
implementing agency or the Procuring Entity, will not affect the structural integrity
of the entire project, the said agency or Procuring Entity shall allow a proportional
reduction in the original performance security: Provided, That any such reduction is
more than ten percent (10%) and that the aggregate of such reductions is not
more than fifty percent (50%) of the original Performance Security.
Section 40. Failure to Enter into Contract and Post Performance Security
40.1 If the bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB or SRRB fails, refuses or is unable to
submit the documents required under Section 37.1 of this IRR or to make good its
bid by entering into a contract with the Procuring Entity or post the required
Performance Security within the period stipulated in this IRR or in the Bidding
Documents, the bid security shall be forfeited and the appropriate sanctions provided
in this IRR and existing laws shall be imposed, except where such failure, refusal or
inability is through no fault of the said bidder.
40.2 In the case of the failure, refusal or inability of the bidder with LCRB or HRRB to
submit the documents required under Section 37.1 of this IRR or to enter into
contract and post the required Performance Security, as provided in this Section, the
BAC shall disqualify the said bidder, and shall initiate and complete the postqualification process on the bidder with the second Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest
Rated Bid: Provided, however, That in the case of Consulting Services, the second
Highest Rated Bid has successfully undergone the negotiation stage in accordance
with Section 33.2.5 of this IRR. This procedure shall be repeated until the LCRB or
HRRB is determined for award. However, if no bidder passes post-qualification, the
BAC shall declare the bidding a failure and conduct a re-bidding with readvertisement. Should there occur another failure of bidding after the conduct of the
contract’s re-bidding, the Procuring Entity concerned may enter into a negotiated
procurement.
40.3 In the case of failure, refusal or inability of the bidder with the SCRB or SRRB to
submit the documents required under Section 37.1 of this IRR or to enter into
contract and post the required Performance Security, as provided in this Section, the
BAC shall disqualify the said bidder, and shall declare the bidding a failure and
conduct a re-bidding with re-advertisement and/or posting, as provided for in
Sections 21 and 25 of this IRR. Should there occur another failure of bidding after
the conduct of the contract’s re-bidding, the Procuring Entity concerned may enter
into a negotiated procurement.
Section 41. Reservation Clause
The HoPE reserves the right to reject any and all bids, declare a failure of bidding, or not
award the contract in the following situations:
a) If there is prima facie evidence of collusion between appropriate public officers or
employees of the Procuring Entity, or between the BAC and any of the bidders, or if
the collusion is between or among the bidders themselves, or between a bidder and a
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
91
third party, including any act which restricts, suppresses or nullifies or tends to
restrict, suppress or nullify competition;
b) If the BAC is found to have failed in following the prescribed bidding procedures; or
c) For any justifiable and reasonable ground where the award of the contract will not
redound to the benefit of the GoP, as follows: (i) if the physical and economic
conditions have significantly changed so as to render the project no longer
economically, financially, or technically feasible, as determined by the HoPE; (ii) if the
project is no longer necessary as determined by the HoPE; or (iii) if the source of
funds for the project has been withheld or reduced through no fault of the Procuring
Entity.(a)
Section 42. Contract Implementation and Termination
42.1 The contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of goods, supplies and
materials are provided for in Annex “D” of this IRR.
42.2 The contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of infrastructure
projects are provided for in Annex “E” of this IRR.
42.3 The contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of consulting services
are provided for in Annex “F” of this IRR.
42.4 The contract termination guidelines as provided for in Annex “I” of this IRR. (n)
42.5 No incentive bonus, in whatever form or for whatever purpose, shall be allowed. (42.4)
42.6 Procuring Entities may cause the issuance of the letter of credit in favor of foreign
suppliers: Provided, That the letter of credit shall be issued by a Government
Servicing Bank: Provided, further, that the cost for the opening of letter of credit
shall be for the account of the foreign supplier and must be stated in the Bidding
Documents: Provided, finally, That payment shall be charged against the letter of
credit only after delivery and acceptance of the goods as certified by the Procuring
Entity.(a)88
RULE XII – DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN PROCUREMENT
Section 43. Procurement of Domestic and Foreign Goods
43.1 Scope and Application
43.1.1 Consistent with the GoP’s obligations under international treaties or
agreements, goods may be obtained from domestic or foreign sources:
Provided, however, That the procurement thereof shall be open only to
eligible suppliers, manufacturers and distributors: Provided, further, That
in the interest of availability, efficiency and timely delivery of goods, the
Procuring Entity may give preference to the purchase of domesticallyproduced and manufactured goods, supplies and materials that meet the
88 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 12-2019, dated 22 April 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
92
specified or desired quality, in accordance with the provisions of
Commonwealth Act No. 138.
43.1.2 The Procuring Entity shall give preference to materials and supplies
produced, made and manufactured in the Philippines, subject to the
conditions herein below specified. The award shall be made to the lowest
Domestic Bidder, provided his bid is not more than fifteen percent (15%)
in excess of the lowest Foreign Bid. (a)
43.1.3 A Domestic Bidder can only claim preference if it secures from the DTI a
certification that the articles forming part of its bid are substantially
composed of articles, materials, or supplies grown, produced, or
manufactured in the Philippines. (43.1.4)
43.2 Procedures and Guidelines
43.2.1 The preference shall be applied when the lowest Foreign Bid is lower
than the lowest bid offered by a Domestic Bidder. The Procuring Entity
shall ensure that both bids are responsive to the minimum requirements
as specified in the Bidding Documents. (a)
43.2.2 For evaluation purposes, the lowest Foreign Bid shall be increased by
fifteen percent (15%).
43.2.3 In the event that the lowest bid offered by a Domestic Bidder does not
exceed the lowest Foreign Bid as increased, the Procuring Entity shall
award the contract to the Domestic Bidder at the amount of the lowest
Foreign Bid. (a)
43.2.4 If the Domestic Bidder refuses to accept the award of contract at the
amount of the Foreign Bid within two (2) calendar days from receipt of
written advice from the BAC, the Procuring Entity shall award the
contract to the bidder offering the Foreign Bid.
43.2.5 The award of contract shall be subject to post-qualification and
submission of all the documentary requirements under this IRR. (n)
RULE XIII – BIDDING OF PROVINCIAL PROJECTS
Section 44. Bidding of Provincial Projects
Priority programs and infrastructure projects funded out of the annual GAA which are
intended for implementation within the province shall be subject to the same competitive
bidding and to the procurement processes prescribed in this IRR. For purposes of this
Section, Engineering District infrastructure projects and priority programs fully funded by the
Government and identified in consultation with the concerned members of Congress, shall
constitute “provincial projects” and shall be governed by this Section.
Section 45. Provincial Bidders
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
93
In accordance with Section 45 of the Act, the right to match accorded to provincial bidders is
no longer available after 26 January 2008.
RULE XIV – LEASE OF COMPUTERS, COMMUNICATIONS, INFORMATION AND
OTHER EQUIPMENT
Section 46. Lease Contracts
The lease of construction and office equipment, including computers, communication and
information technology equipment, are subject to the same competitive bidding and to the
processes prescribed under the Act and this IRR. Lease may also cover lease purchases or
lease-to-own and similar variations.
RULE XV – DISCLOSURE OF RELATIONS
Section 47. Disclosure of Relations
47.1 All bids shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit of the bidder that it is not related
to the HoPE, members of the BAC, the TWG, and the BAC Secretariat, the head of
the PMO or the end-user or implementing unit, and the project consultants, by
consanguinity or affinity up to the third civil degree. Failure to comply with the
aforementioned provision shall be a ground for the automatic disqualification of the
bid in consonance with Section 30 of this IRR. For this reason, relation to the
aforementioned persons within the third civil degree of consanguinity or affinity
shall automatically disqualify the bidder from participating in the procurement of
contracts of the Procuring Entity notwithstanding the act of such persons inhibiting
themselves from the procurement process. On the part of the bidder, this provision
shall apply to the following persons:
a) If the bidder is an individual or a sole proprietorship, to the bidder himself;
b) If the bidder is a partnership, to all its officers and members;
c) If the bidder is a corporation, to all its officers, directors, and controlling
stockholders;
d) If the bidder is a cooperative, to all its officers, directors, and controlling
shareholders or members; and
e) If the bidder is a joint venture, the provisions of items (a), (b), (c), or (d) of
this Section shall correspondingly apply to each of the members of the said
joint venture, as may be appropriate. (a)
47.2 All bidders also found to have conflicting interests with each other shall be
disqualified to participate in the procurement at hand, without prejudice to the
imposition of appropriate administrative, civil, and criminal sanctions. A bidder may
be considered to have conflicting interests with another bidder in any of the events
described in paragraphs (a) through (c) below and a general conflict of interest in
any of the circumstances set out in paragraphs (d) through (j) below:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
94
a) A bidder has controlling shareholders in common with another bidder;
b) A bidder receives or has received any direct or indirect subsidy from any other
bidder;
c) A bidder has the same legal representative as that of another bidder for
purposes of this bid;
d) A bidder has a relationship, directly or through third parties, that puts them in
a position to have access to information about or influence on the bid of
another bidder or influence the decisions of the Procuring Entity regarding
this bidding process. This will include a firm or an organization who lends, or
temporarily seconds, its personnel to firms or organizations which are
engaged in consulting services for the preparation related to procurement for
or implementation of the project if the personnel would be involved in any
capacity on the same project;
e) A bidder submits more than one bid in this bidding process. However, this
does not limit the participation of subcontractors in more than one bid;
f) A bidder who participated as a consultant in the preparation of the design or
technical specifications of the Goods and related services that are the subject
of the bid;
g) A bidder who lends, or temporarily seconds, its personnel to firms or
organizations which are engaged in consulting services for the preparation
related to procurement for or implementation of the project, if the personnel
would be involved in any capacity on the same project;
h) If a consultant combines the function of consulting with those of contracting
and/or supply of equipment;
i) If a consultant is associated with, affiliated to, or owned by a contractor or a
manufacturing firm with departments or design offices offering services as
consultants unless such consultant includes relevant information on such
relationships along with a statement in the technical proposal cover letter to
the effect that the consultant shall limit its role to that of a consultant and
disqualify itself and its associates from work in any other capacity that may
emerge from the project (including bidding for any part of the future project).
The contract with the consultant selected to undertake the project shall
contain an appropriate provision to such effect; or
j) If there is a conflict among consulting projects, the consultant (including its
personnel and subcontractors) and any subsidiaries or entities controlled by
such consultant shall not be recruited for the relevant project. The duties of
the consultant depend on the circumstances of each case. While continuity of
consulting services may be appropriate in particular situations where no
conflict exists, a consultant cannot be recruited to carry out a project that, by
its nature, shall result in conflict with a prior or current project of such
consultant. Examples of the situations mentioned are when a consultant
engaged to prepare engineering design for an infrastructure project shall not
be recruited to prepare an independent environmental assessment for the
same project; similarly, a consultant assisting a Procuring Entity in
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
95
privatization of public assets shall not purchase, nor advise purchasers, of
such assets; or a consultant hired to prepare terms of reference for a project
shall not be recruited for the project in question.(n)
RULE XVI – ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT
Section 48. Alternative Methods
48.1 Subject to the prior approval of the HoPE, and whenever justified by the conditions
provided in this Act, the Procuring Entity may, in order to promote economy and
efficiency, resort to any of the alternative methods of procurement provided in this
Rule. In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the most advantageous
price for the Government is obtained.
48.2 In accordance with Section 10 of this IRR, as a general rule, the Procuring Entities
shall adopt competitive bidding as the general method of procurement and shall see
to it that the procurement program allows sufficient lead time for such competitive
bidding. Alternative methods of procurement shall be resorted to only in highly
exceptional cases provided for in this Rule.
48.3 The method of procurement to be used shall be as indicated in the approved APP. If
the original method of procurement recommended in the APP was competitive
bidding but cannot be ultimately pursued, the BAC, through a resolution, shall justify
and recommend the change in the method of procurement to be approved by the
HoPE. Such changes must be reflected in the APP to be submitted to the GPPB,
pursuant to Section 7.4 of this IRR. (a)
Section 49. Limited Source Bidding
49.1 Limited Source Bidding, otherwise known as selective bidding, is a method of
procurement of Goods and Consulting Services that involves direct invitation to bid
by the Procuring Entity from the list of pre-selected suppliers or consultants89 with
known experience and proven capability on the requirements of the particular
contract. This alternative method of procurement may be employed under any of
the following conditions:
a) Procurement of highly specialized types of goods (e.g., sophisticated defense
equipment, complex air navigation systems, coal) and consulting services
where only a few suppliers or consultants are known to be available, such that
resorting to the competitive bidding method will not likely result in any
additional suppliers or consultants participating in the bidding; or
b) Procurement of major plant components where it is deemed advantageous to
limit the bidding to known qualified bidders in order to maintain uniform quality
and performance of the plant as a whole. (49.1a)
49.2 The pre-selected suppliers or consultants shall be those appearing in a list
maintained by the relevant government authority that has expertise in the type of
procurement concerned. The list of pre-selected suppliers or consultants shall be
89 Refer to Appendix 12 for the Pre-Selection Procedure in the Conduct of Limited Source Bidding.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
96
updated periodically. A copy of the list shall be submitted to, and maintained
updated with, the GPPB.
49.3 The pre-selection shall be based upon the capability and resources of the bidders to
perform the contract taking into account their experience and past performance on
similar contracts, capabilities with respect to personnel equipment or manufacturing
facilities, and financial position. Pre-selection shall be done in accordance with the
following procedures provided in the GPMs.
The BAC of the concerned Procuring Entity shall directly invite all the suppliers or
consultants appearing in the pre-selected list. All other procedures for competitive
bidding shall be undertaken, except for the advertisement of Invitation to
Bid/Request for Expression of Interest under Section 21.2.1 of this IRR.
Section 50. Direct Contracting
Direct Contracting or single source procurement is a method of procurement of Goods that
does not require elaborate Bidding Documents. The supplier is simply asked to submit a
price quotation or a pro-forma invoice together with the conditions of sale. The offer may be
accepted immediately or after some negotiations. Direct contracting may be resorted to by
concerned Procuring Entities under any of the following conditions:
a) Procurement of Goods of proprietary nature which can be obtained only from the
proprietary source, i.e. when patents, trade secrets, and copyrights prohibit others
from manufacturing the same item;
b) When the procurement of critical components from a specific supplier is a condition
precedent to hold a contractor to guarantee its project performance, in accordance
with the provisions of its contract; or
c) Those sold by an exclusive dealer or manufacturer which does not have sub-dealers
selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can be obtained at more
advantageous terms to the GoP.
Section 51. Repeat Order
Repeat Order, when provided for in the APP, is a method of procurement of Goods from the
previous winning bidder, whenever there is a need to replenish goods procured under a
contract previously awarded through Competitive Bidding. Repeat orders shall likewise be
subject to the following conditions:
a) Unit prices of the repeat order must be the same as or lower than those in the original
contract: Provided, That such prices are still the most advantageous to the GoP after
price verification;
b) The repeat order will not result in splitting of contracts, requisitions, or purchase
orders, as provided for in Section 54.1 of this IRR;
c) Except in cases duly approved by the GPPB, the repeat orders shall be availed of only
within six (6) months from the date of the Notice to Proceed arising from the original
contract: Provided, That there has been a partial delivery, inspection and acceptance
of the goods within the same 6-month period; and
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
97
d) Repeat orders shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the quantity of each item
in the original contract. In order not to exceed the 25% threshold, the goods under
the original contract must be:
i. Quantifiable
ii. Divisible; and
iii. Consisting of at least four (4) units per item. (a)
Section 52. Shopping
52.1 Shopping is a method of procurement of Goods whereby the Procuring Entity simply
requests for the submission of price quotations for readily available off-the-shelf
goods or ordinary/regular equipment to be procured directly from suppliers of known
qualifications. This method of procurement shall be employed in any of the following
cases:
a) When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase:
Provided, however, That the amount shall not exceed the thresholds prescribed
in Annex “H”90 of this IRR.
b) Procurement of ordinary or regular office supplies and equipment not available
in the Procurement Service involving an amount not exceeding the thresholds
prescribed in Annex “H” of this IRR.
52.2 The phrase “ordinary or regular office supplies” shall be understood to include those
supplies, commodities, or materials which are necessary in the transaction of official
businesses, and consumed in the day-to-day operations.
However, office supplies shall not include services such as repair and maintenance of
equipment and furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related
or analogous services. (a)
52.3 Under Section 52.1 (b) of this IRR, at least three (3) price quotations from bona fide
suppliers shall be obtained.
52.4 The thresholds prescribed in Annex “H” of this IRR shall be subject to a periodic
review by the GPPB. For this purpose, the GPPB shall be authorized to increase or
decrease the said amount in order to reflect changes in economic conditions and for
other justifiable reasons.
Section 53. Negotiated Procurement
Negotiated Procurement is a method of procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and
Consulting services, whereby the Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract with a
technically, legally and financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant in any of the
following cases:
53.1 Two Failed Biddings. Where there has been failure of competitive bidding or
Limited Source Bidding for the second time as provided in Section 35 of the Act and
this IRR. (a)
90 Consolidated Guidelines for the Alternative Methods of Procurement.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
98
53.2 Emergency Cases. In case of imminent danger to life or property during a state of
calamity, or when time is of the essence arising from natural or man-made calamities
or other causes where immediate action is necessary to prevent damage to or loss of
life or property, or to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other
public utilities.
The instances or situations where the foregoing conditions may be applied include
the provision of immediate response and initial recovery steps to avoid loss of life,
injury, disease and other negative effects on human, physical, mental and social
well-being, together with damage to property, destruction of assets, loss of services,
social and economic disruption and environmental degradation.91
(a)
In the case of Infrastructure Projects, the Procuring Entity has the option to
undertake the project through negotiated procurement or by administration or, in
high security risk areas, through the AFP92
.
53.3 Take-Over of Contracts. Take-over of contracts, which have been rescinded or
terminated for causes provided for in the contract and existing laws, where
immediate action is necessary to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or to
restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other public utilities. (a)
53.4 Adjacent or Contiguous. Where the subject contract is adjacent or contiguous to
an ongoing Infrastructure Project or Consulting Service where the consultants have
unique experience and expertise to deliver the required service: Provided, however,
That (a) the original contract is the result of a Competitive Bidding; (b) the subject
contract to be negotiated has similar or related scopes of work; (c) it is within the
contracting capacity of the contractor/consultant; (d) the contractor/consultant uses
the same prices or lower unit prices as in the original contract less mobilization cost;
(e) the amount of the contiguous or adjacent work involved does not exceed the
amount of the ongoing project; and (f) the contractor/consultant has no negative
slippage/delay: Provided, further, That negotiations for the procurement of the
contiguous or adjacent work are commenced before the expiry of the original
contract.(a)
53.5 Agency-to-Agency. Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting
Services from another agency of the GoP, such as the DBM-PS, which is tasked with
a centralized procurement of Common-Use Supplies for the GoP in accordance with
Letters of Instruction No. 755 and E.O. 359, s. 1989.
53.6 Scientific, Scholarly or Artistic Work, Exclusive Technology and Media
Services. Where Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services can be
contracted to a particular supplier, contractor or consultant and as determined by
the HoPE, for any of the following:
1. The requirement is for:
a. Work of art; commissioned work or services of an artist for a specific
artist skill (e.g., Singer, poet, writer, painter, sculptor, etc.);
91 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2020, dated 9 March 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 13 March
2020.
92 Refer to Appendix 13 for the Guidelines on Implementation of Infrastructure Projects Undertaken by the AFP Corps of
Engineers.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
99
(n)
(n)
b. Scientific, academic, scholarly work or research, or legal services;
c. Highly-specialized life-saving medical equipment, as certified by the
Department of Health (DOH);
d. Scientific, technical, economic, business, trade or legal journal, magazine,
paper, subscription, or other exclusive statistical publications and
references; or
e. Media documentation, advertisement, or announcement through
television, radio, newspaper, internet, and other communication media.
Due to the nature of the information to be disseminated, alongside principles of
transparency, efficiency and economy, award to more than one (1) supplier
may be made by the Procuring Entity.
2. The construction or installation of an infrastructure facility where the material,
equipment, or technology under a proprietary right can only be obtained from
the same contractor. (n)
53.7 Highly Technical Consultants. In the case of individual consultants hired to do
work that is (i) highly technical or proprietary; or (ii) primarily confidential or policy
determining, where trust and confidence are the primary consideration for the
hiring of the consultant: Provided, however, That the term of the individual
consultants shall, at the most, be on a six month basis, renewable at the option of
the appointing HoPE, but in no case shall exceed the term of the latter.
53.8 Defense Cooperation Agreement; Defense Inventory-Based Items.93
a. Defense Cooperation Agreement. The DND may directly negotiate with
an agency or instrumentality of another country with which the Philippines
has entered into a defense cooperation agreement or otherwise maintains
diplomatic relations when the procurement involves major defense equipment
or materiel and/or defense-related consultancy services subject to the
following conditions: 94
1. The Secretary of National Defense has deemed it necessary in order
to protect the interest of the country;(n)95
2. The expertise or capability required is not locally available; and 96
3. The defense equipment or materiel and/or defense-related
consultancy services to be procured under this modality is included in
the Armed Forces of the Philippines Modernization Program previously
approved by the President of the Philippines.97
(n)
b. Defense Inventory-Based Items. The DND may directly negotiate
with a supplier or manufacturer in procuring inventory-based items,
93 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 23-2018, dated 4 December 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
94 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 23-2018, dated 4 December 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
95 Ibid.
96 Ibid.
97 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
100
which pertain to major defense equipment or materiel as contemplated
in Section 53.8(a) subject to the following conditions:98
(n)
1. The Secretary of National Defense has determined that it is necessary
to negotiate directly with a supplier or manufacturer in order to
protect the interest of the country;99
(n)
2. Resort to direct negotiation will address compatibility, interoperability
and sustainability;100
(n)
3. The supplier or manufacturer had fully and satisfactorily implemented
a contract of the same item with the DND or any of its bureaus or
attached agencies; and101
(n)
4. The supplier or manufacturer shall provide a performance security in
accordance with Section 39 of this IRR.102
(n)
53.9 Small Value Procurement. Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and
Consulting Services, where the amount involved does not exceed the threshold
prescribed in Annex "H" of this IRR: Provided, That in case of Goods, the
procurement does not fall under shopping in Section 52 of this IRR. (a)
53.10 Lease of Real Property and Venue. Lease of real property and venue for official
use, subject to Annex “H” of this IRR. (a)
53.11 NGO Participation. When an appropriation law or ordinance earmarks an amount
to be specifically contracted out to Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), the
Procuring Entity may enter into a Memorandum of Agreement with an NGO, subject
to the guidelines103 issued by the GPPB for the purpose. (a)
53.12 Community Participation. Where, in the interest of project sustainability or to
achieve certain specific social objectives, it is desirable in selected projects, or its
components, to call for participation of local communities through Community or
Social Groups, or members thereof in the delivery of Goods and Simple
Infrastructure Projects, subject to the Guidelines issued by the GPPB.104
53.13 United Nations Agencies, International Organizations or International
Financing Institutions. Procurement from specialized agencies of the United
Nations, International Organizations or International Financing Institutions, of any
of the following: (a) small quantities of off-the-shelf goods, primarily in the fields of
education and health; (b) specialized products where the number of suppliers is
limited, such as but not limited to vaccines or drugs; or (c) Goods, Infrastructure
Projects and Consulting Services, involving advanced technologies, techniques and
innovations not locally available as certified by the HoPE, when it is most
advantageous to the government.(a)
98 Ibid.
99 Ibid.
100 Ibid.
101 Ibid.
102 Ibid.
103 Refer to Appendix 14 for the Guidelines on Non-Governmental Organization Participation in Public Procurement.
104 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 18-2021, dated 22 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 12 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
101
53.14 Direct Retail Purchase of Petroleum Fuel, Oil and Lubricant (POL)
Products and Airline Tickets. Where Goods and Services are required by a
Procuring Entity for the efficient discharge of its principal mandate, governmental
functions, or day-today operations, direct retail purchase of (i) petroleum fuel, oil
and lubricant (POL) products; and (ii) airline tickets may be made by end-users
delegated to procure the same from identified direct suppliers or service
providers.105
(n)
Section 54. Terms and Conditions for the use of Alternative Methods
54.1 Splitting of Government Contracts is not allowed. Splitting of Government Contracts
means the division or breaking up of GoP contracts into smaller quantities and
amounts, or dividing contract implementation into artificial phases or sub-contracts
for the purpose of evading or circumventing the requirements of law and this IRR,
particularly the necessity of competitive bidding and the requirements for the
alternative methods of procurement.
For Infrastructure Projects to be implemented by phases, the Procuring Entity shall
ensure that there is a clear delineation of work for each phase, which must be usable
and structurally sound. It shall also ensure the conduct of the detailed engineering
activities for each phase as provided for in Annex “A” of this IRR. (a)
54.2 For alternative methods of procurement, the Procuring Entity may dispense with the
advertisement in the newspaper and posting requirement as prescribed in Section
21.2.1 of this IRR.
For the following modalities, however, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post the
invitation or request for submission of price quotations/proposals in the PhilGEPS
website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any
conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity
for a period of at least three (3) calendar days:
1. Section 49 Limited Source Bidding;
2. Section 52.1(b) Shopping for ordinary office supplies and equipment not available
in DBM-PS (for ABC above Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000.00));
3. Section 53.1 Two Failed Biddings;
4. Section 53.9 Small Value Procurement (For ABC above Fifty Thousand Pesos
(₱50,000.00)); and
5. Section 53.11 NGO Participation. (a)
54.3 In all instances of alternative methods of procurement, the BAC, through the
Secretariat, shall post, for information purposes, the notice of award, contract or
purchase order, including notice to proceed if necessary, in the PhilGEPS website,
the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous
place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity, except for
contracts with ABC of Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000.00) and below.(a)
105 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 24-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
102
54.4 Except for Limited Source Bidding under Section 49 of this IRR, submission of bid
securities may be dispensed with.
54.5 Performance and Warranty Securities.
Performance and/or warranty securities are required for the following alternative
methods of procurement, in accordance with Sections 39 and 62 of this IRR:
54.6 Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors, and/or consultants are mandated
to register with PhilGEPS and provide a PhilGEPS Registration Number in the
following alternative methods of procurement as condition for award of the contract:
a. Section 50 - Direct Contracting
b. Section 52.1 (b) - Shopping for Ordinary Office Supplies and Equipment not
available in DBM-PS
c. Section 53.3 - Take Over of Contracts (Only for New Bidders, if any.)
d. Section 53.6 - Scientific, Scholarly, or Artistic Work, Exclusive Technology and
Media Services
e. Section 53.7 - Highly Technical Consultants
f. Section 53.9 - Small Value Procurement
Alternative Method of
Procurement
Performance Security
(PS)
Warranty Security
(WS)
Limited Source Bidding 
For highly specialized types
of goods, WS is required.
Direct Contracting x 
Repeat Order x 
Two Failed Biddings 

In no case shall WS be
required in the procurement
of Consulting Services.
 Emergency Cases
Procuring Entity may require
PS depending on the nature
of the procurement project.
However, for Infrastructure
Projects, PS is required.
Procuring Entity may require
WS depending on the nature
of the procurement project.
In no case shall WS be
required in the procurement
of Consulting Services.
Take-over of Contracts  
Adjacent/Contiguous 
For Infrastructure Projects,
WS is required.
Small Value Procurement
l
i
Procuring Entity may require
PS depending on the nature
of the procurement project.
However, for Infrastructure
Projects, PS is required.
Procuring Entity may require
WS depending on the nature
of the procurement project.
In no case shall WS be
required in the procurement
of Consulting Services.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
103
g. Section 53.10 - Lease of Real Property and Venue
h. Section 53.11 - NGO Participation
For purposes of Limited Source Bidding under Section 49, the BAC shall require the
submission of a certificate of PhilGEPS registration in accordance with Section 8.5.2
of this IRR. 106
54.7 The specific terms, conditions and documentary requirements, including the
limitations and restrictions, for the application of each of the alternative methods
mentioned in this article shall be provided for in Annex "H" of this IRR and guidelines
specifically issued for this purpose. (n)
RULE XVII – PROTEST MECHANISM
Section 55. Protests on Decisions of the BAC
55.1 Decisions of the BAC at any stage of the procurement process may be questioned by
filing a request for reconsideration within the three (3) calendar days upon receipt of
written notice or upon verbal notification. The BAC shall decide on the request for
reconsideration within seven (7) calendar days from receipt thereof. The bidder shall
not be allowed to submit additional documents to correct any defects in the bid
submitted.
If a failed bidder signifies his intent to file a request for reconsideration, the BAC
shall keep the bid envelopes of the said failed bidder unopened and/or duly sealed
until such time that the request for reconsideration has been resolved. (a)
55.2 In the event that the request for reconsideration is denied, decisions of the BAC may
be protested in writing to the HoPE: Provided, however, That a prior request for
reconsideration should have been filed by the party concerned in accordance with
the preceding Section, and the same has been resolved.
55.3 The protest must be filed within seven (7) calendar days from receipt by the party
concerned of the resolution of the BAC denying its request for reconsideration. A
protest shall be made by filing a verified position paper with the HoPE concerned,
accompanied by the payment of a non-refundable protest fee, which shall be paid in
cash in accordance with the following schedule:(a)
ABC RANGE PROTEST FEE
₱50 million and below 0.75% of the ABC
More than ₱50 million to ₱100 million ₱500,000.00
More than ₱100 million to ₱500 million 0.5% of the ABC
More than ₱500 million to ₱1 billion ₱2,500,000.00
More than ₱1 billion to ₱2 billion 0.25% of the ABC
More than ₱2 billion to ₱5 billion ₱5,000,000.00
More than ₱5 billion 0.1 % of the ABC
55.4 The verified position paper shall contain the following information:
106 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
104
a) The name of bidder;
b) The office address of the bidder;
c) The name of project/contract;
d) The implementing office/agency or Procuring Entity;
e) A brief statement of facts;
f) The issue to be resolved; and
g) Such other matters and information pertinent and relevant to the proper
resolution of the protest.
The position paper is verified by an affidavit that the affiant has read and
understood the contents thereof and that the allegations therein are true and
correct of his personal knowledge or based on authentic records. An unverified
position paper shall be considered unsigned, produces no legal effect, and results to
the outright dismissal of the protest.
In addition, the bidder shall likewise certify under oath that:
a) he has not theretofore commenced any action or filed any claim involving the
same issues in any court, tribunal or quasi-judicial agency and, to the best of
his knowledge, no such other action or claim is pending therein;
b) if there is such other pending action or claim, he is including a complete
statement of the present status thereof; and
c) if he should thereafter learn that the same or similar action or claim has been
filed or is pending, he shall report that fact within five (5) days therefrom to the
HoPE wherein his protest is filed.
Failure to comply with the foregoing requirements shall not be curable by mere
amendment of the verified position paper.
Section 56. Resolution of Protests
The protests shall be resolved strictly on the basis of records of the BAC. The HoPE shall
resolve the protest within seven (7) calendar days from receipt thereof. Subject to the
provisions of existing laws on the authority of Department Secretaries and the heads of
agencies, branches, constitutional commissions, or instrumentalities of the GoP to approve
contracts, the decisions of the HoPE concerned shall be final up to the limit of his contract
approving authority. With respect to LGUs, the decision of the local chief executive shall be
final. (a)
Section 57. Non-interruption of the Bidding Process
In no case shall any protest taken from any decision treated in this Rule stay or delay the
bidding process: Provided, however, That protests must first be resolved before any award
is made.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
105
Section 58. Resort to Regular Courts; Certiorari
58.1 Court action may be resorted to only after the protests contemplated in this Rule
shall have been completed, i.e., resolved by the HoPE with finality. The regional trial
court shall have jurisdiction over final decisions of the HoPE. Court actions shall be
governed by Rule 65 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure.
58.2 This provision is without prejudice to any law conferring on the Supreme Court the
sole jurisdiction to issue temporary restraining orders and injunctions relating to
Infrastructure Projects of the GoP.
58.3 The head of the BAC Secretariat of the Procuring Entity concerned shall ensure that
the GPPB shall be furnished a copy of the cases filed in accordance with this Section.
RULE XVIII – SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Section 59. Arbitration
59.1 If any dispute or difference of any kind whatsoever shall arise between the parties in
connection with the implementation of the contract covered by the Act and this IRR,
the parties shall make every effort to resolve amicably such dispute or difference by
mutual consultation.
59.2 Any and all disputes arising from the implementation of a contract covered by the
Act and this IRR shall be submitted to arbitration in the Philippines according to the
provisions of R.A. 876, otherwise known as the "Arbitration Law" and R.A. 9285,
otherwise known as the “Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 2004”: Provided,
however, That disputes that are within the competence of the Construction Industry
Arbitration Commission to resolve shall be referred thereto. The process of
arbitration shall be incorporated as a provision in the contract that will be executed
pursuant to the provisions of the Act and this IRR: Provided, further, That by mutual
agreement, the parties may agree in writing to resort to other alternative modes of
dispute resolution.
Section 60. Appeals
The arbitral award and any decision rendered in accordance with the foregoing Section shall
be appealable by way of a petition for review to the Court of Appeals. The petition shall
raise pure questions of law and shall be governed by the Rules of Court.
RULE XIX – CONTRACT PRICES AND WARRANTIES
Section 61. Contract Prices
61.1 For the given scope of work in the contract as awarded, all bid prices shall be
considered as fixed prices, and therefore not subject to price adjustment and
escalation during contract implementation, except under extraordinary circumstances
and upon prior approval of the GPPB107
, or when a Treaty or International or
107 Refer to Appendix 15 for the Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
106
Executive Agreement expressly allows it pursuant to Section 4 of this IRR.
61.2 In cases where the cost of the awarded contract is affected by any applicable new
laws, ordinances, regulations, or other acts of the GoP, promulgated after the date of
bid opening, a contract price adjustment shall be made or appropriate relief shall be
applied on a no loss-no gain basis.(17a)
61.3 Any request for price escalation under extraordinary circumstances shall be
submitted by the concerned entity to the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA) with the endorsement of the Procuring Entity. The burden of
proving the occurrence of extraordinary circumstances that will allow for price
escalation shall rest with the entity requesting for such escalation. NEDA shall only
respond to such request after receiving the proof and the necessary documentation.
For purposes of this Section, “extraordinary circumstances” shall refer to events that
may be determined by the NEDA in accordance with the Civil Code of the Philippines,
and upon the recommendation of the Procuring Entity concerned.
61.4 All contracts shall be denominated and payable in Philippine currency, and this shall
be stated in the Bidding Documents: Provided, however, That subject to the
guidelines108 issued by the GPPB, the Procuring Entity may provide in the Bidding
Documents that obligations may be paid in foreign currency, which shall be accepted
or tradeable by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas;109 Provided, further, That should the
Procuring Entity receive bids denominated in foreign currency, the same shall be
converted to Philippine currency based on the exchange rate prevailing on the day of
the bid opening for purposes of bid comparison and evaluation.(a)
Section 62. Warranty
62.1 For the procurement of Goods, in order to assure that manufacturing defects shall be
corrected by the supplier, a warranty security shall be required from the contract
awardee for a minimum period of three (3) months, in the case of Expendable
Supplies, or a minimum period of one (1) year, in the case of Non-expendable
Supplies, after acceptance by the Procuring Entity of the delivered supplies.
The obligation for the warranty shall be covered by either retention money in an
amount equivalent to at least one percent (1%) but not to exceed five percent (5%)
of every progress payment, or a special bank guarantee equivalent to at least one
percent (1%) but not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total contract price. The
said amounts shall only be released after the lapse of the warranty period or, in the
case of Expendable Supplies, after consumption thereof: Provided, however, That
the supplies delivered are free from patent and latent defects and all the conditions
imposed under the contract have been fully met. (a)
62.2 For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects, the following warranties shall be
made:
62.2.1 From the time project construction commenced up to final acceptance,
the contractor shall assume full responsibility for the following:
108 Refer to Appendix 16 for the Guidelines on Procurements Involving Foreign-Denominated Bids, Contract Prices, and
Payment Using Letters of Credit.
109 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2020, dated 28 July 2020, published in the Official Gazette on 21 September 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
107
a) any damage or destruction of the works except those occasioned by
force majeure; and
b) safety, protection, security, and convenience of his personnel, third
parties, and the public at large, as well as the works, equipment,
installation and the like to be affected by his construction work. (a)
62.2.2 One (1) year from project completion up to final acceptance or the
defects liability period.
62.2.2.1 The contractor shall undertake the repair works, at his own
expense, of any damage to the infrastructure on account of
the use of materials of inferior quality, within ninety (90)
days from the time the HoPE has issued an order to
undertake repair. In case of failure or refusal to comply with
this mandate, the Procuring Entity shall undertake such
repair works and shall be entitled to full reimbursement of
expenses incurred therein upon demand.
62.2.2.2 The defects liability period shall be covered by the
Performance Security of the contractor required in Section
39.1 of this IRR, which shall guarantee that the contractor
performs his responsibilities stated in the immediately
preceding Section. If the contractor fails to comply with its
obligations under Section 62.2.2.1 of this IRR, the Procuring
Entity shall forfeit its performance security, subject its
property(ies) to attachment or garnishment proceedings,
and perpetually disqualify it from participating in any
competitive bidding. All payables of the GoP in his favor
shall be offset to recover the costs.
62.2.3 From final acceptance of the project up to the period prescribed in
Section 62.2.3.2 of this IRR.
62.2.3.1 The following shall be held responsible for “Structural
Defects,” i.e., major faults/flaws/deficiencies in one or more
key structural elements of the project which may lead to
structural failure of the completed elements or structure, or
“Structural Failures,” i.e., where one or more key structural
elements in an infrastructure facility fails or collapses,
thereby rendering the facility or part thereof incapable of
withstanding the design loads, and/or endangering the
safety of the users or the general public:
a) Contractor – Where Structural Defects/Failures arise
due to faults attributable to improper construction, use
of inferior quality/substandard materials, and any
violation of the contract plans and specifications, the
contractor shall be held liable;
b) Consultants – Where Structural Defects/Failures arise
due to faulty and/or inadequate design and
specifications as well as construction supervision, then
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
108
the consultant who prepared the design or undertook
construction supervision for the project shall be held
liable;
c) Procuring Entity’s Representatives / Project Manager /
Construction Managers and Supervisors – The project
owner’s representative(s), project manager,
construction manager, and supervisor(s) shall be held
liable in cases where the Structural Defects/Failures
are due to his/their willful intervention in altering the
designs and other specifications; negligence or
omission in not approving or acting on proposed
changes to noted defects or deficiencies in the design
and/or specifications; and the use of substandard
construction materials in the project;
d) Third Parties - Third Parties shall be held liable in
cases where Structural Defects/Failures are caused by
work undertaken by them such as leaking pipes,
diggings or excavations, underground cables and
electrical wires, underground tunnel, mining shaft and
the like, in which case the applicable warranty to such
structure should be levied to third parties for their
construction or restoration works.
e) Users - In cases where Structural Defects/Failures are
due to abuse/misuse by the end-user or implementing
unit of the constructed facility and/or non–compliance
by a user with the technical design limits and/or
intended purpose of the same, then the user
concerned shall be held liable.
62.2.3.2 The warranty against Structural Defects and Failures shall
cover the following periods from final acceptance, except
those occasioned by force majeure:
a) Permanent Structures: Fifteen (15) years
Buildings of types 4 and 5 as classified under the
National Building Code of the Philippines and other
structures made of steel, iron, or concrete which
comply with relevant structural codes (e.g., DPWH
Standard Specifications), such as, but not limited to,
steel/concrete bridges, flyovers, aircraft movement
areas, ports, dams, tunnels, filtration and treatment
plants, sewerage systems, power plants, transmission
and communication towers, railway system, and other
similar permanent structures;
b) Semi-Permanent Structures: Five (5) years
Buildings of types 1, 2, and 3 as classified under the
National Building Code of the Philippines,
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
109
concrete/asphalt roads, concrete river control,
drainage, irrigation lined canals, river landing, deep
wells, rock causeway, pedestrian overpass, and other
similar semi-permanent structures; and
c) Other Structures: Two (2) years
Bailey and wooden bridges, shallow wells, spring
developments, and other similar structures.
62.2.3.3 To guarantee that the contractor shall perform his
responsibilities as prescribed in Section 62.2.3.1(a) of this
IRR, it shall be required to post a warranty security in
accordance with the following schedule:
Form of Warranty Security
Amount of Warranty
Security
(Not less than the required
percentage of the Total
Contract Price)
a) Cash or Letter of Credit issued
by a Universal or Commercial
Bank: Provided, however, That
the Letter of Credit shall be
confirmed or authenticated by a
Universal or Commercial Bank,
if issued by a foreign bank.
For biddings conducted by
LGUs, the Letter of Credit may
be issued by other banks
certified by the BSP as
authorized to issue such
financial instrument. (a)
Five percent (5%)
b) Bank guarantee confirmed by a
Universal or Commercial Bank.
For biddings conducted by
LGUs, the bank draft/guarantee
may be issued by other banks
certified by the BSP as
authorized to issue such
financial instrument. (a)
Ten percent (10%)
c) Surety bond callable upon
demand issued by GSIS or a
surety or insurance company
duly certified by the Insurance
Commission as authorized to
issue such security.
Thirty percent (30%)
62.2.3.4 The warranty security shall be denominated in Philippine
Pesos, remain effective for one (1) year from the date of
issuance of the Certificate of Final Acceptance by the
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
110
Procuring Entity, and returned only after the lapse of the
said one (1) year period.
62.2.4 In case of Structural Defects/Failure occurring during the applicable
warranty period provided in Section 62.2.3.2 hereof, the Procuring Entity
shall undertake the necessary restoration or reconstruction works and
shall be entitled to full reimbursement by the parties found to be liable
for expenses incurred therein upon demand, without prejudice to the
filing of appropriate administrative, civil, and/or criminal charges against
the responsible persons as well as the forfeiture of warranty securities
posted in favor of the Procuring Entity.
RULE XX – THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD
Section 63. Organization and Functions
63.1 The Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB), as established in Section 63 of
the Act, shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
a) To protect national interest in all matters affecting public procurement, having
due regard to the country’s regional and international obligations;
b) To formulate and amend public procurement policies, rules and regulations,
and amend, whenever necessary, this IRR;
c) To prepare a generic procurement manual and the standard bidding forms for
procurement;
d) To ensure the proper implementation by Procuring Entities of the Act, this IRR
and all other relevant rules and regulations pertaining to public procurement;
e) To establish a sustainable training program to develop the capacity of
Government procurement officers and employees, and to ensure the conduct
of regular procurement training programs by and for Procuring Entities; and
f) To conduct an annual review of the effectiveness of the Act and recommend
any amendments thereto, as may be necessary. (a)
63.2 The GPPB Technical Support Office
The GPPB shall create a Technical Support Office (TSO) which shall provide support
in the performance of its duties and responsibilities specified in the Act and this
IRR. The TSO shall be an attached agency of the DBM and shall be under its
administrative supervision for general oversight and for budgeting purposes.
The GPPB shall determine the TSO’s organizational structure and staffing, subject
to DBM approval. The TSO shall be headed by an Executive Director and supported
by Deputy Executive Directors, of good moral character, unquestionable integrity,
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
111
. (a)
and known probity, to be appointed by the President of the Republic of the
Philippines 110
All other employees of the TSO shall be appointed by its Executive Director.111
(a)
63.3 The TSO shall provide research, technical and administrative support to the GPPB,
including:
a) Research-based procurement policy recommendations and rule-drafting;
b) Development and updating of generic procurement manuals and standard
bidding forms;
c) Management and conduct of training on procurement systems and procedures;
d) Evaluation of the effectiveness of the government procurement system and
recommendation of improvements in systems and procedures;
e) Monitoring the compliance to the Act and assisting Procuring Entities improve
their compliance;
f) Monitoring the implementation and effectiveness of the PHILGEPS; and
g) Secretariat support.
63.4 In addition to the powers granted under the Act and this IRR, the GPPB shall
absorb all the powers, functions and responsibilities of the Procurement Policy
Board created under E.O. 359, s. 1989. All functions related to procurement policymaking of the Infrastructure Committee of the NEDA Board are transferred to the
GPPB.
Section 64. Membership112
The GPPB shall be composed of the Secretary of the Department of Budget and
Management, as Chairperson, the Director-General of NEDA, as Alternate Chairperson, with
the following as Members; the Secretaries of the Departments of Public Works and
Highways, Finance, Trade and Industry, Health, National Defense, Education, Interior and
Local Government, Science and Technology, Transportation, Information and
Communications Technology, and Energy, or their duly authorized representatives, and a
representative from the private sector to be appointed by the President upon the
recommendation of the GPPB. The GPPB may invite representatives from the COA or from
relevant Government agencies and private sectors to serve as resource persons.
RULE XXI – PENAL CLAUSE
110 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 17-2019, dated 17 July 2019, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 26 July
2019.
111 Ibid.
112 Pursuant to Section 10(h) of RA No. 11363 or “An Act Establishing the Philippine Space Development and Utilization Policy
and Creating The Philippine Space Agency, and for Other Purposes” approved on 8 August 2019, the Director-General of the
Philippine Space Agency shall serve as a member of the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) as established by
Republic Act No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
112
Section 65. Offenses and Penalties
65.1 Without prejudice to the provisions of R.A. 3019 and other penal laws, public officers
who commit any of the following acts shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not
less than six (6) years and one (1) day, but not more than fifteen (15) years:
a) Opening any sealed bid including but not limited to Bids that may have been
submitted through the electronic system and any and all documents required to
be sealed or divulging their contents, prior to the appointed time for the public
opening of Bids or other documents.
b) Delaying, without justifiable cause, the screening for eligibility, opening of bids,
evaluation and post evaluation of bids, and awarding of contracts beyond the
prescribed periods of action provided for in this IRR.
c) Unduly influencing or exerting undue pressure on any member of the BAC or
any officer or employee of the Procuring Entity to take a particular action which
favors, or tends to favor a particular bidder.
d) Splitting of contracts which exceed procedural purchase limits to avoid
competitive bidding or to circumvent the limits of approving or procurement
authority.
e) Abuse by the HoPE of his power to reject any and all bids as mentioned under
Section 41 of the Act and this IRR, with manifest preference to any bidder who
is closely related to him in accordance with Section 47 of the Act and this IRR.
When any of the foregoing acts is done in collusion with private individuals, the
private individuals shall likewise be liable for the offense.
In addition, the public officer involved shall also suffer the penalty of temporary
disqualification from public office, while the private individual shall be permanently
disqualified from transacting business with the Government.
65.2 Private individuals who commit any of the following acts, and any public officer who
conspires with them, shall upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of
not less than six (6) years and one (1) day but not more than fifteen (15) years:
a) When two or more bidders agree and submit different bids as bona fide
bidders, all the while knowing that the bid(s) of one or more of them was so
much higher than the other that the latter could not be honestly accepted and
that the contract will surely be awarded to the pre-arranged lowest bid.
b) When a bidder maliciously submits different bids through two or more persons,
corporations, partnerships or any other business entity in which he has an
interest, to create the appearance of competition that does not in fact exist so
as to be adjudged as the winning bidder.
c) When two or more bidders enter into an agreement which calls upon one or
more of them to refrain from bidding for procurement contracts, or which
requires one or more of them to withdraw Bids already submitted, in order to
secure an undue advantage to any one of them.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
113
d) When a bidder, by himself or in connivance with others, employs schemes
which tend to restrain the natural rivalry of the parties or operates to stifle or
suppress competition and thus produce a result disadvantageous to the public.
In addition, the public officer persons involved shall also suffer the penalty of
temporary or perpetual disqualification from public office and the private individual
shall be permanently disqualified from transacting business with the Government.
65.3 Private individuals who commit any of the following acts, and any public officer
conspiring with them, shall upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of
not less than six (6) years and one (1) day but not more than fifteen (15) years:
a) Submitting eligibility requirements of whatever kind and nature that contain
false information or falsified documents calculated to influence the outcome of
the eligibility screening process or conceal such information in the eligibility
requirements when the information will lead to a declaration of ineligibility from
participating in competitive bidding.
b) Submitting Bidding Documents of whatever kind and nature that contain false
information or falsified documents or conceal such information in the Bidding
Documents, in order to influence the outcome of the competitive bidding.
c) Participating in a competitive bidding using the name of another or allowing
another to use one’s name for the purpose of participating in a competitive
bidding.
d) Withdrawing a bid, after it shall have qualified as the Lowest Calculated
Bid/Highest Rated Bid, or refusing to accept an award, without just cause or for
the purpose of forcing the Procuring Entity to award the contract to another
bidder. This shall include the non-submission within the prescribed time, or
delaying the submission of requirements such as, but not limited to,
performance security, preparatory to the final award of the contract.
65.4 It is understood that the above penalties and offenses shall cover all types of
procurement whether done manually or electronically.
65.5 When the bidder is a juridical entity, criminal liability and the accessory penalties
shall be imposed on its directors, officers or employees who actually commit any of
the foregoing acts. If a person previously held liable or found guilty under the
provisions of the Act and this IRR has a controlling interest in a prospective bidderentity, the said bidder-entity shall be disqualified to participate in any procurement
activity being conducted by the Government.
Section 66. Jurisdiction
Jurisdiction over the offenses defined under this Rule shall belong to the appropriate courts,
according to laws existing at the time of the commission of the offenses.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
114
RULE XXII – CIVIL LIABILITY
Section 67. Civil Liability in Case of Conviction
Without prejudice to administrative sanctions that may be imposed in proper cases, a
conviction under the Act and this IRR or R.A. 3019 shall carry with it civil liability, which may
either consist of restitution for the damage done or the forfeiture in favor of the government
of any unwarranted benefit derived from the act or acts in question, or both, at the
discretion of the courts.
Section 68. Liquidated Damages
All contracts executed in accordance with the Act and this IRR shall contain a provision on
liquidated damages which shall be payable by the contractor in case of breach thereof. For
the procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services, the amount of
the liquidated damages shall be at least equal to one-tenth of one percent (0.001) of the
cost of the unperformed portion for every day of delay. Once the cumulative amount of
liquidated damages reaches ten percent (10%) of the amount of the contract, the Procuring
Entity may rescind or terminate the contract, without prejudice to other courses of action
and remedies available under the circumstances. (a)
RULE XXIII – ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Section 69. Imposition of Administrative Penalties
69.1 In addition to the provisions of Rules XXI and XXII of this IRR, the HoPE, subject to
the authority delegated to the BAC, if any, shall impose on bidders or prospective
bidders, the administrative penalty of suspension for one (1) year for the first
offense, and suspension of two (2) years for the second offense from participating in
the competitive bidding process, as well as disqualification from further participating
in the competitive bidding being undertaken by the Procuring Entity concerned,
where applicable, for the following violations:
a) Submission of eligibility requirements containing false information or falsified
documents.
b) Submission of Bids that contain false information or falsified documents, or the
concealment of such information in the Bids in order to influence the outcome
of eligibility screening, or any other stage of the competitive bidding.
c) Allowing the use of one’s name, or using the name of another for purposes of
competitive bidding.
d) Withdrawal of a bid, or refusal to accept an award, or enter into contract with
the Government without justifiable cause, after he had been adjudged as
having submitted the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated
Responsive Bid.
e) Refusal or failure to post the required performance security within the
prescribed time.
f) Termination of the contract due to the default of the bidder.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
115
g) Refusal to clarify or validate in writing its bid during post-qualification within a
period of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the request for clarification.
h) Any documented attempt by a bidder to unduly influence the outcome of the
bidding in his favor.
i) All other acts that tend to defeat the purpose of the competitive bidding, such
as habitually withdrawing from bidding, submitting late Bids or patently
insufficient bid, for at least three (3) times within a year, except for valid
reasons.
69.2 In addition to the penalty of suspension, the bid security or the performance
security posted by the concerned bidder or prospective bidder shall also be
forfeited.
69.3 The HoPE may delegate to the BAC the authority to impose the aforementioned
administrative penalties.
69.4 The procedures for the suspension or blacklisting of suppliers, contractors, or
consultants for GoP projects shall be undertaken in accordance with the
guidelines113 issued by the GPPB.
Section 70. Preventive Suspension
The HoPE may preventively suspend any member of the Technical Working Group or the
Secretariat, or the BAC, if there are strong reasons or prima facie evidence showing that the
officials or employees concerned are guilty of the charges filed against them under Rules
XXI and XXII of this IRR, or for dishonesty as defined by the Civil Service Laws. For
uniformed personnel of the AFP, the substantive and procedural due process under its
justice system shall be applied. In all cases, due process as mandated by the Constitution
and Civil Service laws, rules and regulations, shall be strictly observed.
Section 71. Lifting of Suspension and Removal of Administrative Disabilities
Lifting of preventive suspension pending administrative investigation, as well as removal of
administrative penalties and disabilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 52 and 53, Chapter 6, Subtitle A (Civil Service Commission), Title I, Book V of E.O.
292, otherwise known as the Administrative Code of 1987.
RULE XXIV – LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF BAC MEMBERS
Section 72. Private Legal Assistance
All the members of the BAC are hereby authorized to engage the services of private lawyers
or external counsel immediately upon receipt of Court Notice that a civil or criminal action,
suit or proceeding is filed against them in connection with the lawful performance of their
official functions and duties as BAC members. The lawyer's fee shall be part of the
indemnification package for the BAC members, subject to the provisions of Section 73 of the
Act and this IRR. For purposes of this Rule, the BAC members shall be understood to include
its support staff, such as the members of the TWG and the BAC Secretariat.
113 Refer to Appendix 17 for the Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors, and
Consultants.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
116
Section 73. Indemnification of BAC Members
73.1 The GPPB shall establish an equitable indemnification package114 for public officials
providing services in and for the BAC, which may be in the form of free legal
assistance, liability insurance, and other forms of protection and indemnification for
all reasonable fees, costs, and expenses incurred by such persons in connection with
any administrative, civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding to which they may be,
or have been made, a party, by reason of the lawful performance of their official
functions and duties, unless they are finally adjudged in such action or proceeding to
be liable for gross negligence or misconduct or grave abuse of discretion, or
otherwise held liable or guilty of the complaints or charges.In the event of a
settlement or compromise, indemnification shall be confined only on matters covered
by the settlement, for which the Procuring Entity had been advised by counsel, that,
the public officials to be indemnified have not committed gross negligence or
misconduct or grave abuse of discretion in the performance of their functions and
duties.The members of the BAC and its support staff, such as the members of the
TWG and the BAC Secretariat, shall also be entitled to medical assistance for injuries
incurred in the performance of their functions.
RULE XXV – FINAL PROVISIONS
Section 74. Amendment
74.1 As the need arises, this IRR may be amended by the GPPB.
74.2 Any amendment to this IRR shall be applicable to all procurement activities, the
advertisement or invitation of which were issued after the date of effectivity of the
said amendment.
Section 75. Repealing Clause
The Act repeals E.O. 40, entitled “Consolidating Procurement Rules and Procedures for All
National Government Agencies, Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations and/or
Government Financial Institutions, and Requiring the Use of the Government Electronic
Procurement System;” E.O. 262, s. 2000, entitled "Amending E.O. 302, s. 1996, entitled
"Providing Polices, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations for the Procurement of Goods/
Supplies by the National Government" and Sec. Three (3) of E.O. 201, s. 2000, entitled
"Providing Additional Policies and Guidelines in the Procurement of Goods/Supplies by the
National Government;" E.O. 302, s. 1996, entitled "Providing Policies, Guidelines, Rules and
Regulations for the Procurement of Goods/Supplies by the National Government" and
Presidential Decree No. 1594 (P.D. 1594), dated June 11, 1978, entitled “Prescribing
Policies, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations for Government Infrastructure Contracts;" and
the relevant provisions of R.A. 7898 dated February 23, 1995, entitled “An Act Providing for
the Modernization of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and for Other Purposes.” This law
amends Title Six, Book Two of R.A. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code
of 1991," and, in furtherance thereto, Chapter Five, Title One, Book One of the same law;
the relevant provisions of E.O. 164, s. 1987, entitled "Providing Additional Guidelines in the
114 Refer to Appendix 18 for the Guidelines for Legal Assistance and Indemnification of Bids and Awards Committee (BAC)
Members and its Support Staff.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
117
Processing and Approval of Contracts of the National Government." Any other law,
presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order,
proclamation, charter, rule or regulation and/or parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent with
the provisions of the Act is hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.
This IRR repeals Memorandum Order No. 119 dated 18 September 2003, otherwise known
as the “Implementing Rules and Regulations Part A”: GPPB Resolution 03-2009 dated 22
July 2009, otherwise known as the Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations; and
relevant portions of E.O. 301, s. 1987 entitled “Decentralizing Actions on Government
Negotiated Contracts, Lease Contracts and Records Disposal.” Any other issuance, executive
order, administrative order, proclamation, charter, rule or regulation and/or parts thereof
contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this IRR is hereby repealed, modified or
amended accordingly.
Section 76. Separability Clause
If any provision in this IRR, or application of such provision to any circumstance, is declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.
Section 77. Transitory Clause
77.1 In all procurement activities, if the advertisement or invitation for bids was issued
prior to the effectivity of the Act, the provisions of E.O. 40 and its IRR, P.D. 1594
and its IRR, R.A. 7160 and its IRR, or other applicable laws, as the case may be,
shall govern.
77.2 In cases where the advertisements or invitations for bids were issued before the
effectivity of this IRR, Procuring Entities may continue adopting the procurement
procedures, rules, and regulations provided in the Revised IRR of 2009 or other
applicable laws, as the case may be. (a)
Section 78. Effectivity Clause
This IRR shall take effect sixty (60) calendar days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the University of the
Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of this IRR. (a)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “A”
118
ANNEX “A”
DETAILED ENGINEERING FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS
1. Detailed engineering shall proceed only on the basis of the feasibility or preliminary
engineering study made which establishes the technical viability of the project and
conformance to land use and zoning guidelines prescribed by existing laws. The
findings contained in the feasibility study, if undertaken for the project, shall be
examined. If, in the course of this exercise, it is found that changes would be
desirable in the design standards of principal features, as proposed, specific
recommendations for such changes shall be supported by detailed justifications,
including their effects on the cost, and (if necessary) the economic justification.
2. A schedule of detailed engineering activities shall include the following:
a) Survey
b) Site Investigation
c) Soils and Foundation Investigation
d) Construction Materials Investigation
e) Preparation of Design Plans
f) Preparation of Technical Specifications
g) Preparation of Quantity and Cost Estimates
h) Preparation of Program of Work
i) Preparation of Proposed Construction Schedule (and estimated Cash Flow for
projects with Schedule over Six (6) Months)
j) Preparation of Site or Right-of-Way Plans including Schedule of Acquisition
k) Preparation of Utility Relocation Plan
l) Preparation and Submission of Design Report
m) Environmental Impact Statement for critical project as defined by the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)
n) Preparation of minimum requirements for a Construction Safety and Health
Program for the project being considered
o) Value Engineering Studies
p) Preparation of Bid/Tender Documents(a)
3. Work under detailed engineering shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “A”
119
a) Design Standards – Design standards shall be in accordance with appropriate
standards and accepted detailed engineering practice adopted by the agency
concerned. Design standards for structures shall take into account, among
other things, the seismicity of the area to determine the optimum safety of
structures and to minimize possible earthquake damage.
b) Field Surveys and Investigations – Necessary field surveys and investigations
which may include aerial, hydrographic, topographic, hydrologic, sub-surface,
monumenting and other surveys shall be carried out in accordance with the
design guidelines, criteria and standards adopted by the agency concerned. All
survey and investigation works shall be prepared in a manner satisfactory to
carry out accurate design and production of plans that will permit quantity
estimates to be made within plus or minus ten percent (10%) of the final
quantities of the completed structure.
c) Contract Plans – The following plans shall be prepared for each construction
contract in accordance with guidelines and standards adopted by the procuring
entity concerned, incorporating at least the following:
i) Site development plan
ii) Plans and profile sheet
iii) Typical sections and details
iv) Drainage details where applicable
v) Structural plans at appropriate scales indicating all details necessary in
order that the complete structure can be set out and constructed
vi) Other details which may be required by the head of the agency
d) Quantities – All construction quantities shall be computed to a reasonable
accuracy of not more than plus or minus ten percent (10%) of the final
quantities of the as-built structure.
e) Special Provisions – Specifications shall be prepared for specific terms of work
or methods of construction, measurement and payment under each contract,
which are not covered by Standard Construction and Material Specifications
adopted by the procuring entity concerned.
f) Unit Prices – These shall be prepared for each contract using costs based on
reasonable approved current prices as projected over the proposed
construction period, divided into local and foreign exchange costs, as the case
may be.
g) Approved Budget for the Contract – the ABC to be bid shall be prepared by
official(s) duly designated by the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned or by
his duly authorized official. It shall be approved by the Head of the Procuring
Entity or his duly designated official.
Since the contracts are fixed price contracts, the ABC to be bid shall provide for
the projected movements of construction costs over the construction period
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “A”
120
considering the projected inflation and foreign exchange rates as issued by the
Development Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC). It shall also show the
local and foreign currency requirements, as the case may be.
The ABC to be bid shall specify for each major work item, such as earthwork,
roadwork, and massive concreting, the components for equipment rentals,
fuel, labor, materials and overhead, including the cost of the approved
construction safety and health program and warranty premium.
h) Bidding Documents – These shall be prepared as provided for in the IRR.
i) Program of Work – Before prosecuting any project, the necessary program of
work shall be prepared and submitted for approval. In no case shall
construction funds be remitted to field offices or construction work on a project
be started before the program of work is approved, in accordance with existing
laws.
No program of work for any project shall be approved without detailed
engineering. The program of work shall include, among other things,
estimates of the work, items, quantities and costs and a PERT/CPM network of
the project activities. The program of work shall cover at least a usable portion
of the project and no construction shall be started for portions of the project
that are less than usable, except projects requiring stage construction, in which
case continuity of construction up to the completion of a usable portion must
be assured.
j) Contract Time or Duration – In the preparation of the Bidding Documents, the
agency shall make an estimate of the actual number of working days required
to complete the project through PERT/CPM analysis of the project activities and
corrected for holidays and weekends. Likewise, the agency shall make an
estimate of the number of rainy/unworkable days considered unfavorable for
the prosecution of the works at the site, based on the records of the Philippine
Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA),
and incorporate the same in the corrected actual number of working days
determined above, which shall be made the basis of the total contract time.
The estimated number of rainy/unworkable days considered unfavorable for
the prosecution of the works at the site shall be made known before the date
of bidding through the Instructions to Bidders for the purpose of guiding the
contractor in preparing his bid and as reference to both the GOP and winning
contractors taking action on the requests for time extensions. Without the
estimated number of rainy/unworkable days established before the bidding
date and made known to all participating bidders, the contract time is
presumed to have excluded the unfavorable conditions.
k) Warranty Period – Likewise, the Bidding Documents shall specify the type of
project and the corresponding warranty period required by the procuring
entity.
l) Value Engineering – For major projects as specified by the agency, value
engineering shall be conducted according to accepted standards and practices.
Value engineering shall analyze alternative schemes of achieving the projects
objectives in order to delete or reduce non-essential features and lessen the
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “A”
121
life cycle costs of the projects without sacrificing the quality and integrity of the
structure, while maintaining its essential function, performance, and safety.
m) Site or Right-of-Way Acquisition Plans and Resettlement Action Plans – These
shall be prepared based on parcellary surveys and socio-economic surveys of
households affected by the project.
4. For projects to be implemented by phases, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that there
is a clear delineation of work for each phase, which must be usable, and structurally
sound. It shall also ensure the conduct of the detailed engineering activities for each
phase as provided for in Item 2 of this Guidelines. (n)
5. As a requirement for the procurement of infrastructure works, the concerned
consultants/government officials who prepared and approved the detailed engineering
shall issue a certification that the detailed engineering surveys and designs have been
conducted according to the prescribed agency standards and specifications in
conformance with the provisions of this Annex, and that the detailed engineering
outputs are adequate for the procurement at hand. The approval by the authorized
government officials of detailed engineering surveys and designs undertaken by
consultants neither diminishes the responsibility of the latter for the technical integrity
of the surveys and designs nor transfer any part of that responsibility to the approving
officials.
6. The above rules shall apply to the implementation of infrastructure projects under
normal or ordinary conditions. However, under emergency or extraordinary cases
involving major calamities and disasters as declared by the President where time is of
the essence to save lives and properties and restore damaged infrastructures, detailed
engineering works shall be conducted in accordance with the guidelines and
procedures, as prescribed by the head of the appropriate infrastructure agency and
approved by the Infrastructure Committee of the National Economic and Development
Authority Board, to enable quick response to said cases, while maintaining the safety
and integrity of the structure.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “B”
122
1. Definition
ANNEX “B”
GENERAL PRINCIPLES ON CONSULTING SERVICES
A natural or juridical person, qualified by appropriate education, training and relevant
experience to render any or all of the types and fields of consulting services as defined
in this IRR, shall be considered as a “Consultant,” subject to the requirements provided
in this IRR for eligibility check and post-qualification.
2. The Need for Consultants
The services of consultants may be engaged by any procuring entity for government
projects or related activities of such magnitude and/or scope as would require a level
of expertise or attention beyond the optimum in-house capability of the procuring
entity concerned and consistent with the Government’s policy not to compete with the
private sector.
3. Independence of Consultants
To ensure the consultant’s professional independence, integrity, and objectivity,
consultants, as well as key staff working for the consulting entity, who may be directly
or indirectly associated with non-consulting firms that may have an interest in or bias
towards the project concerned, shall be selected only if they agree to limit their role to
that of consultants and will disqualify themselves and their affiliates for bidding for
products and services of the same government project.
4. Hiring of Consultants
4.1 Consultants shall be hired on the basis of their proven expertise, experience and
capability. Under certain conditions provided herein, cost may be included as a
factor in the selection of consultants. In order to manifest trust and confidence in
and promote the development of Filipino consultancy, Filipino consultants shall be
hired whenever the services required for the project are within the expertise and
capability of Filipino consultants: Provided, however, That in the event Filipino
consultants do not have the sufficient expertise and capability to render the services
required under the project, as determined by the Head of the Procuring Entity,
foreign consultants may be hired.
4.3 In the hiring of foreign consultants, all pertinent laws and regulations of the
Philippines shall be followed.
4.4 Technology and knowledge transfer to the procuring entity shall be required in the
provision of consulting services, where applicable.
5. Organization of Consultants115
5.1 The umbrella organization of consultants recognized by the Government shall be
composed of the various organizations of consultants that may be engaged by the
Government under this IRR and shall accredit its members on the types of services
and fields of professions where the members are technically and financially qualified
to offer their services. The umbrella organization shall prepare and certify a list of
fields and expertise in such fields available with the names of the accredited local
115 Refer to Appendix 19 for the Revised Guidelines on the Recognition of Umbrella Organization of Consultants.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “B”
123
consultants which shall be updated annually or as often as necessary and
disseminate such list to concerned agencies of the Government. It shall likewise
regulate its members for the development of the industry. The Government may
consult and deal with this umbrella organization on matters relating to the industry.
The GPPB shall be the appropriate government body that shall recognize the
consultants’ umbrella organization. The umbrella organization may submit its files of
accredited consultants to the BAC of the procuring entity in accordance with the form
prescribed by the BAC which can serve as registration of the consultants under the
next succeeding Subsection: Provided, however, That each such accredited
consultant shall comply with the eligibility requirements provided in this IRR. Such
qualification statements, together with the list of accredited consultants prepared in
accordance with the immediately preceding section, shall guide the BAC in
determining the fields where Filipino consultants are already qualified and capable
and where foreign consultants may not be required.
6. Types of Consulting Services
The services to be provided by consultants can be divided into six (6) broad
categories, namely: (a) advisory and review services; (b) pre-investment or feasibility
studies; (c) design; (d) construction supervision; (e) management and related
services; and (f) other technical services or special studies.
6.1. Advisory and Review Services. These services include advice on particular
projects or problems. These will include advice on and review of, among
others, planning, design and other professional services, as well as
management, production, inspection, testing and quality control. They also
include such services as appearances before commissions, boards or other
judicial bodies to give evidence or otherwise submit professional opinions.
6.2. Pre-Investment or Feasibility Studies. These are the studies which normally
precede decisions to go (or not to go) forward with specific projects. These
studies may have as their objectives:
a) To establish investment priorities and sector policies - Studies for this
objective include, among others, basic resource inventories, such as, river
basin surveys, transport sector surveys, and studies of alternative
development patterns and of sectors on a regional or nationwide scale.
b) To determine the basic features and the feasibility of individual projects -
Studies for this objective include, among others, the functional design,
project site selection, architectural and space programming and physical
layout of specific projects, preliminary design and cost estimates, and the
economic, financial and environmental impact analyses required for
project evaluation.
c) To define and propose changes in governmental policies, operations and
institutions necessary for the successful implementation or functioning of
investment projects - Studies for this objective include, among others,
analysis of project related organizations, administrative problems,
planning machinery, regulatory and marketing policies, accounting, and
management systems, manpower resources and training requirements.
6.3. Design. This type of services normally consists of three (3) phases:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “B”
124
a) Pre-Design Phase – establishes the general size and scope of the project
and its location on the site. The services include but are not limited to
reconnaissance, topographical and other engineering and land surveys,
soils investigations, preparation of preliminary architectural/engineering
designs, layouts, outline specifications, preliminary cost estimates and
specific recommendations prior to actual design;
b) Basic Design Phase – includes the preparation of detailed plans, designs,
working drawings, specifications, detailed cost estimates and tender
documents required for invitations of bids for construction works and
equipment; and
c) Support Services During Construction – includes assistance and advice in
securing bids, tabulation and analysis of bid results, and making
recommendations on the award of construction contracts, and in
preparing formal contract documents; preparation of supplementary
drawings required to suit actual field conditions; checking detailed
construction and as-built drawings, shop and erection drawings submitted
by contractors; making periodic visits to check on the general progress of
work and quality of materials and workmanship; observing performance
tests and start-up and making report thereon; and making a final
inspection and reporting of completed project.
6.4. Construction Supervision. These include the following:
a) Inspection and expediting of the work;
b) Verification and checking of quantities and qualities of work accomplished
by the contractor as against the approved plans, specifications, and
programs of work;
c) Issuance of instruction for corrections of defects on the work;
d) Verification and recommendation for approval of statements of work
accomplished and certificate of project completed by the contractor;
e) Review and recommendation for approval of progress and final billings of
the contractor; and
f) Provision of record or as-built drawings of the completed projects.
The above do not mean direction, superintendence, or management of
construction.
6.5. Management and Related Services. These may include the following:
a) Sector policy and regional development studies;
b) Planning, feasibility, market, economic, financial, technical, operations
and sociological studies;
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “B”
125
c) Project management, including procurement advisory services, impact
monitoring, and post-evaluation services;
d) Production management, inventory control, and productivity
improvement;
e) Marketing management and systems;
f) Information and communications technology services, including but not
limited to, information systems design and development, and network
design and installation;
g) Institutional strengthening, organization development, manpower
requirements, training and technology transfer;
h) General management consultancy; and
i) Other related services.
6.6. Other Technical Services or Special Studies. The Technical Services may
include the following:
a) Institution building, including organization and management studies, and
business process re-engineering and development;
b) Design and execution of training programs at different levels;
c) Provision of staff to carry out certain functions and to train their
replacements; and
d) Tasks relating to economic and financial studies such as those of tariff
structures.
The Special Studies may include the following and other studies not covered
under any of the services and studies described above:
a) Soils investigation;
b) Studies, tests and process determination performed to establish design
criteria for water facilities;
c) Detailed mill, shop, and/or laboratory inspection of materials and
equipment;
d) Land surveys, establishment of boundaries and monuments, and related
office computations and drafting;
e) Parcellary surveys;
f) Engineering surveys (for design and construction) and photogrammetry;
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “B”
126
g) Assistance in litigation arising from the development or construction of
projects and in hearings before various approving and regulatory
agencies;
h) Investigation involving detailed consideration of the operation,
maintenance, and overhead expenses; and the preparation of rate
schedules; earning and expense statements, feasibility studies,
appraisals, evaluations, and material audits or inventories required for
certification of force account construction performed by the agencies;
i) Preparation of environmental statements and assistance to the agencies
in public hearings;
j) Preparation of operating instructions and manuals for facilities and
training of personnel and assistance in initial operation of facilities;
k) Designs to meet unique and/or above normal requirements brought
about by severe earthquakes, tornadoes, or blasts, or satisfy unique or
abnormal tolerances, safety requirements, etc.;
l) Site and physical planning;
m) Environmental and other aspects of planning;
n) Housing;
o) Interior design;
p) Studies on preservation and restoration of historical, cultural, and
artworks;
q) Landscaping;
r) Construction management; and
s) Defense systems design, including self-reliance defense program.
Technology and knowledge transfer should be considered an important objective
in the provision of consulting services.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “C”
127
ANNEX “C”
RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD ALLOWED
FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES
Section Procurement
Activity
Minimum
Calendar
Days
Recommended
for Activity
Operational
Timeline
(Recommended
Earliest
Possible Time)
Maximum
Calendar
Days
Allowed
for
Activity
Operational
Timeline
(Maximum
Period
Allowed)
Conditions /
Remarks
20 Pre-Procurement
Conference 1 CD Day 0
Whenever
necessary
0
Optional for ABC of
₱2,000,000.00 and
below
21.2.1
Advertisement /
Posting of
Invitation to Bid
7 CDs Days 1 to 7 7 CDs Day 1 to 7
Start of Availability
of Bidding
Documents
22.2 Pre-Bid Conference 1 CD Day 8
Whenever
necessary
Day 8 to 40
 Optional for ABC
below
₱1,000,000.00
 Not Earlier than 7
CDs from
Advertisement /
Posting
 12 CDs before
Deadline of
Submission and
Receipt of Bids
25.5
Deadline of
Submission and
Receipt of Bids /
Bid Opening
1 CD Day 20 45 CDs Day 52
Last day of
Availability of
Bidding Documents
32.4 Bid Evaluation 1 CD Day 21 7 CDs Day 53 to 59
34.8 Post-Qualification 2 CDs116 Day 22 to 23 45 CDs Day 60 to
104
The bidder must
submit all PostQualification
Requirements
within 5 CDs from
receipt of notice as
bidder with LCB in
accordance with
Sec. 34.2.
37.1.2
Approval of
Resolution/Issuanc
e of Notice of
Award
1 CD Day 24 15 CDs Day 105 to
119
37.2.1
Contract
Preparation and
Signing
1 CD Day 25 10 CDs Day 120 to
129
37.3
Approval of
contract by higher
authority
1CD 20 or 30
CDs If necessary.
37.4.1 Issuance of Notice
to Proceed 1 CD Day 26 7 CDs Day 130 to
136
TOTAL TIME
26 CDs 136 CDs
Excluding Approval
of Higher Authority,
if applicable.
116 One (1) calendar day is allotted for the BAC to notify the Bidder that it has the Lowest Calculated Bid (LCB).
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “C”
128
RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD ALLOWED
FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
Section Procurement
Activity
Minimum
Calendar Days
Recommended
for Activity
Operational
Timeline
(Recommended
Earliest Possible
Time)
Maximum
Calendar
Days
Allowed
for Activity
Operational
Timeline
(Maximum
Period
Allowed)
Conditions / Remarks
20
PreProcurement
Conference
1 Day 0
Whenever
necessary 0
Optional for ABC of
₱5,000,000.00 and below
21.2.1
Advertisement /
Posting of
Invitation to Bid
7 CDs Days 1 to 7 7 CDs Day 1 to 7
Start of Availability of
Bidding Documents
22.2 Pre-Bid
Conference 1 CD Day 8
Whenever
necessary
Day 8 to 45
----
Day 8 to 60
 Optional for ABC below
₱1,000,000.00
 Not Earlier than 7 CDs
from Advertisement /
Posting
 12 CDs before Deadline
of Submission and
Receipt of Bids
25.5
Deadline of
Submission and
Receipt of Bids /
Bid Opening
1 CD Day 20
50 CDs117
----
65 CDs118
Day 57
----
Day 72
Last day of Availability of
Bidding Documents
32.4 Bid Evaluation 1 CD Day 21 7 CDs
Day 58 to 64
----
Day 73 to 79
34.8 PostQualification 2 CDs119 Day 22 to 23 45 CDs
Day 65 to 109
----
Day 80 to 124
The bidder must submit all
Post-Qualification
Requirements within 5 CDs
from receipt of notice as
bidder with LCB in
accordance with Sec. 34.2.
37.1.2
Approval of
Resolution/Issu
ance of Notice
of Award
1 CD Day 24 15 CDs
Day 110 to 124
---
Day 125 to 139
37.2.1
Contract
Preparation and
Signing
1 CD Day 25 10 CDs
Day 125 to 134
----
Day 140 to 149
37.3
Approval of
contract by
higher authority
1CD 20 or 30 CDs If necessary.
37.4.1
Issuance of
Notice to
Proceed
1 CD Day 26 7 CDs
Day 135 to 141
----
Day 150 to 156
TOTAL TIME 26 CDs 141 CDs or
156 CDs
Excluding Approval of
Higher Authority, if
applicable.
117 For Infrastructure Projects ₱50,000,000.00 and below.
118 For Infrastructure Projects above ₱50,000,000.00.
119 One (1) calendar day is allotted for the BAC to notify the Bidder that it has the LCB.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “C”
129
RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD ALLOWED
FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF CONSULTING SERVICES
Section Procurement
Activity
Minimum
Calendar Days
Recommended
for Activity
Operational
Timeline
(Recommended
Earliest Possible
Time)
Maximum
Calendar
Days
Allowed
for Activity
Operational
Timeline
(Maximum
Period
Allowed)
Conditions / Remarks
20
PreProcurement
Conference
1 CD Day 0
Whenever
necessary 0
Optional for ABC of
₱1,000,000.00 and
below.
21.2.1
Advertisement /
Posting of
Request for
Expression of
Interest
7 CDs Days 1 to 7 7 CDs Day 1 to 7
Start of Availability of
Bidding Documents
24.5.4 Eligibility Check
and Shortlisting 1 CD Day 8 20 CDs Day 8 to 27
22.2 Pre-Bid
Conference 1 CD Day 15 Whenever
necessary Day 34 to 70
 Optional for ABC below
₱1,000,000.00
 Not Earlier than 7 CDs
from determination of
shortlisted consultants.
 12 CDs before Deadline
of Submission and
Receipt of Bids
25.5
Deadline of
Submission and
Receipt of Bids /
Bid Opening
1 CD Day 27 75 CDs Day 82 Last day of Availability of
Bidding Documents
33.4 Bid Evaluation 1 CD Day 28 21 CDs Day 83 to 103
33.2.1
Approval of
Ranking by the
HoPE
1 CD Day 29 2 CDs Day 104 to 105
Notification for
Negotiation 1 CD Day 30 3 CDs Day 106 to 108
33.2.5 Negotiation 1 CD Day 31 10 CDs Day 109 to 118
34.8 PostQualification 2 CDs120 Day 32 to 33 30 CDs Day 119 to 148
The bidder must submit
all Post-Qualification
Requirements within 5
CDs from receipt of
notice as the bidder with
the HRB in accordance
with Sec. 34.2.
37.1.2
Approval of
Resolution/Issu
ance of Notice
of Award
1 CD Day 34 15 CDs Day 149 to 163
37.2.1
Contract
Preparation and
Signing
1 CD Day 35 10 CDs Day 164 to 173
37.3
Approval of
contract by
higher authority
1CD 20 or 30 CDs If necessary.
37.4.1
Issuance of
Notice to
Proceed
1 CD Day 36 7 CDs Day 174 to 180
TOTAL TIME 36 CDs 180 CDs
Excluding Approval of
Higher Authority, if
applicable.
120 One (1) calendar day is allotted for the BAC to notify the Bidder that it has the Highest Rated Bid (HRB).
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “D”
130
ANNEX “D”
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS,
SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS
1. Amendment to Order
1.1. Subject to the conditions set forth below, amendments to order may be issued at
any time by the procuring entity concerned. If any such order increases or
decreases the cost of, or the time required for executing any part of the work
under the original contract, an equitable adjustment in contract price and/or
delivery schedule shall be mutually agreed upon between the parties concerned,
and the contract modified in writing.
1.2. An amendment to order may be issued only in emergency cases or during
fortuitous events requiring necessary adjustments within the general scope of the
contract in any one or more of the following is required in order to fully meet the
requirements of the project:
a) drawings, design or specifications, if the goods to be furnished are to be
specifically manufactured for the Government in accordance therewith;
b) method of shipment or packing; or
c) place of delivery.
1.3. An amendment to order may also be issued by the concerned procuring entity
where there are additional items needed and necessary for the protection of the
goods, which were not included in the original contract. Payments for these
additional items shall be based on the unit prices in the original contract for items
of goods similar to those in the original contract. If the contract does not contain
any rate applicable to the additional items, then suitable prices shall mutually be
agreed upon between the parties. Request for payment by the supplier for any
additional items shall be accompanied by a statement with the approved
supporting forms, giving a detailed accounting and record of amount for which it
claims payment. The contract time shall likewise be extended if the acquisition of
such additional items so warrants.
1.4. Under no circumstances shall a supplier proceed to commence work under any
amendment to order unless the same has been approved by the Head of the
Procuring Entity concerned or his duly authorized representative. As an exception
to the rule, the Regional Director/Head concerned may authorize the immediate
start of work under any amendment to order in the event of emergencies to
avoid detriment to public service, or damage to life and/or property or when time
is of the essence: Provided, however, That the same is valid only on items up to
the point where the cumulative increase in the contract cost which has not yet
been duly fully approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned or his
duly authorized representative does not exceed five percent (5%) of the original
contract cost: Provided, further, That the corresponding amendment to order
shall immediately be prepared and submitted for approval to the Head of the
Procuring Entity concerned or his duly authorized representative. For an
amendment to order involving a cumulative amount exceeding five percent (5%)
of the original contract price, no work thereon shall be commenced unless the
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “D”
131
same has been approved by the Head of Procuring Entity concerned or his duly
authorized representative: Provided, That, the said cumulative amount does not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the original contract price.
2. Suspension of Work
2.1 The procuring entity may suspend the work wholly or partly by written order
for a certain period of time, as it deems necessary due to force majeure or any
fortuitous events as defined in the contract. The supplier shall take all
reasonable steps to minimize the costs allocable to the work covered by such
order during work stoppage.
2.2 Before the suspension order expires, the procuring entity concerned shall either
lift such order or terminate the work covered by the same. If the suspension
order is lifted, or if the period of the order expires, the supplier shall have the
right to resume work. Appropriate adjustments shall be made in the delivery or
contract schedule, or contract price, or both, and the contract shall be modified
accordingly.
3. Liquidated Damages
3.1 When the supplier fails to satisfactorily deliver goods under the contract within
the specified delivery schedule, inclusive of duly granted time extensions, if
any, the supplier shall be liable for damages for the delay and shall pay the
procuring entity liquidated damages, not by way of penalty, an amount equal to
one-tenth (1/10) of one percent (1%) of the cost of the delayed goods
scheduled for delivery for every day of delay until such goods are finally
delivered and accepted by the procuring entity concerned.The procuring entity
need not prove that it has incurred actual damages to be entitled to liquidated
damages. Such amount shall be deducted from any money due or which may
become due to the supplier, or collected from any securities or warranties
posted by the supplier, whichever is convenient to the procuring entity
concerned. In case the total sum of liquidated damages reaches ten percent
(10%) of the total contract price, the procuring entity concerned may rescind
the contract and impose appropriate sanctions over and above the liquidated
damages to be paid.121
4. Advance Payment
4.1 In accordance with Presidential Decree 1445, advance payment shall be made
only after prior approval of the President, and shall not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the contract amount, unless otherwise directed by the President;
Provided, however, that for cases mentioned under 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 of these
guidelines, no prior approval by the President shall be necessary.
4.2 All progress payments shall first be charged against the advance payment until
the latter has been fully exhausted, unless otherwise approved by the
President.
121 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 02-2020, dated 27 February 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 22 April 2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “D”
132
4.3 A single advance payment not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the contract
amount shall be allowed for contracts entered into by a procuring entity for the
following services where requirement of down payment is a standard industry
practice:
a) Hotel and restaurant services;
b) Use of conference/seminar and exhibit areas; and
c) Lease of office space.
4.4 Advance payment not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the contract amount,
unless otherwise directed by the President, shall also be allowed for
procurement of goods required to address contingencies arising from natural or
man-made calamities in areas where a “State of Calamity” has been declared
by appropriate authorities.
4.5 Upon submission of an irrevocable letter of credit or bank guarantee issued by
a Universal or Commercial Bank, advance payment not to exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the contract amount shall be allowed and paid within sixty
(60) calendar days from signing of the contract. The irrevocable letter of credit
or bank guarantee must be for an equivalent amount, shall remain valid until
the goods are delivered, and accompanied by a claim for advance payment.
5. Other Rules and Guidelines
The rules and regulations for the other aspects of contract implementation shall be
included in the manuals to be issued by the GPPB, such as, but not limited to, the
following:
a) Incidental Services;
b) Spare Parts;
c) Delays in the Supplier’s Performance;
d) Purchaser’s Responsibilities;
e) Prices;
f) Payment;
g) Taxes and Duties;
h) Subcontracts;
i) Standards;
j) Packing;
k) Insurance;
l) Transportation;
m) Inspections and Tests;
n) Patent Rights;
o) Limitations of Liability;
p) Termination for Default;
q) Termination for Insolvency;
r) Termination for Convenience; and
s) Assignment.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
133
ANNEX “E”
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
1. VARIATION ORDERS - CHANGE ORDER/EXTRA WORK ORDER
1.1. Variation Orders may be issued by the procuring entity to cover any
increase/decrease in quantities, including the introduction of new work items that
are not included in the original contract or reclassification of work items that are
either due to change of plans, design or alignment to suit actual field conditions
resulting in disparity between the preconstruction plans used for purposes of
bidding and the "as staked plans" or construction drawings prepared after a joint
survey by the contractor and the Government after award of the contract,
provided that the cumulative amount of the positive or additive Variation Order
does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the original contract price. The
addition/deletion of works under Variation Orders should be within the general
scope of the project as bid and awarded. The scope of works shall not be
reduced so as to accommodate a positive Variation Order. A Variation Order may
either be in the form of either a change order or extra work order.
1.2. A Change Order may be issued by the implementing official to cover any
increase/decrease in quantities of original work items in the contract.
1.3. An Extra Work Order may be issued by the implementing official to cover the
introduction of new work necessary for the completion, improvement or
protection of the project which was not included as items of work in the original
contract, such as, where there are subsurface or latent physical conditions at the
site differing materially from those indicated in the contract, or where there are
duly unknown physical conditions at the site of an unusual nature differing
materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as
inherent in the work or character provided for in the contract.
1.4. Any cumulative positive Variation Order beyond ten percent (10%) of the original
contract price shall be subject of another contract to be bid out if the works are
separable from the original contract. In exceptional cases where it is urgently
necessary to complete the original scope of work, the Head of the Procuring
Entity may authorize a positive variation order that will make the cumulative
value of the positive Variation Orders go beyond ten percent (10%) but not more
than twenty percent (20%) of the original contract price, subject to the
guidelines to be determined by the GPPB: Provided, however, That appropriate
sanctions shall be imposed on the designer, consultant or official responsible for
the original detailed engineering design which failed to consider the Variation
Order beyond ten percent (10%).
1.5. In claiming for any Variation Order, the contractor shall, within seven (7)
calendar days after such work has been commenced pursuant to Item 3.2
hereof; or, within twenty eight (28) calendar days after the circumstances or
reasons justifying a claim for extra cost shall have occurred, deliver a notice
giving full and detailed particulars of any extra cost in order that it may be
investigated at that time. Failure to provide either of such notices in the time
stipulated shall constitute a waiver by the contractor for any claim. The
preparation and submission of Variation Orders are as follows:
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
134
a) If the procuring entity’s representative/Project Engineer believes that a
Change Order or Extra Work Order should be issued, he shall prepare the
proposed Order accompanied with the notices submitted by the contractor,
the plans therefore, his computations as to the quantities of the additional
works involved per item indicating the specific stations where such works
are needed, the date of his inspections and investigations thereon, and the
log book thereof, and a detailed estimate of the unit cost of such items of
work, together with his justifications for the need of such Change Order or
Extra Work Order, and shall submit the same to the Head of the Procuring
Entity for approval.
b) The Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative upon
receipt of the proposed Change Order or Extra Work Order shall
immediately instruct the appropriate technical staff or office of the
procuring entity to conduct an on-the-spot investigation to verify the need
for the work to be prosecuted and to review the proposed plan, and prices
of the work involved.
c) The technical staff of appropriate office of the procuring entity shall submit
a report of their findings and recommendations, together with the
supporting documents, to the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly
authorized representative for consideration.
d) The Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative,
acting upon the recommendation of the technical staff or appropriate office,
shall approve the Change Order or Extra Work Order after being satisfied
that the same is justified, necessary, and in order.
e) The timeframe for the processing of Variation Orders from the preparation
up to the approval by the procuring entity concerned shall not exceed thirty
(30) calendar days.
2. ADDITIONAL/EXTRA WORK COSTING
2.1. For Variation Orders, the contractor shall be paid for additional work items whose
unit prices shall be derived based on the following:
a. For additional/extra works duly covered by Change Orders involving work
items which are exactly the same or similar to those in the original
contract, the applicable unit prices of work items original contract shall be
used.
b. For additional/extra works duly covered by Extra Work Orders involving
new work items that are not in the original contract, the unit prices of the
new work items shall be based on the direct unit costs used in the original
contract (e.g., unit cost of cement, rebars, form lumber, labor rate,
equipment rental, etc.). All new components of the new work item shall
be fixed prices, provided the same is acceptable to both the Government
and the contractor, and provided further that the direct unit costs of new
components shall be based on the contractor's estimate as validated by the
procuring entity concerned via documented canvass in accordance with
existing rules and regulations. The direct cost of the new work item shall
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
135
then be combined with the mark-up factor (i.e., taxes and profit) used by
the contractor in his bid to determine the unit price of the new work item.
2.2. Request for payment by the contractor for any extra work shall be accompanied
by a statement, with the approved supporting forms, giving a detailed accounting
and record of amount for which he claims payment. Said request for payment
shall be included with the contractor's statement for progress payment.
3. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH CONTRACTOR IS TO START WORK UNDER
VARIATION ORDERS AND RECEIVE PAYMENTS
3.1. Under no circumstances shall a contractor proceed to commence work under any
Change Order or Extra Work Order unless it has been approved by the Head of
the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative.
3.2. However, under any of the following conditions, the procuring entity’s
representative/Project Engineer may, subject to the availability of funds and
within the limits of his delegated authority, allow the immediate start of work
under any Change Order or Extra Work Order:
i) In the event of an emergency where the prosecution of the work is urgent
to avoid detriment to public service, or damage to life and/or property;
and/or
ii) When time is of the essence;
Provided, however, That such approval is valid on work done up to the point
where the cumulative increase in value of work on the project which has not yet
been duly fully approved does not exceed five percent (5%) of the adjusted
original contract price;
Provided, further, That immediately after the start of work, the corresponding
Change Order or Extra Work Order shall be prepared and submitted for approval
in accordance with the above rules herein set. Payments for works satisfactorily
accomplished on any Change Order or Extra Work Order may be made only after
approval of the same by the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized
representative.
Provided, finally, That for a Change Order or Extra Work Order involving a
cumulative amount exceeding five percent (5%) of the original contract price, no
work thereon may be commenced unless said Change Order or Extra Work Order
has been approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized
representative.
4. ADVANCE PAYMENT
4.1. The procuring entity shall, upon a written request of the contractor which shall
be submitted as a contract document, make an advance payment to the
contractor in an amount not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of the total contract
price, to be made in lump sum or, at the most, two installments according to a
schedule specified in the Instructions to Bidders and other relevant Tender
Documents.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
136
4.2. The advance payment shall be made only upon the submission to and
acceptance by the procuring entity of an irrevocable standby letter of credit of
equivalent value from a commercial bank, a bank guarantee or a surety bond
callable upon demand, issued by a surety or insurance company duly licensed by
the Insurance Commission and confirmed by the procuring entity.
4.3. The advance payment shall be repaid by the contractor by deducting fifteen
percent (15%) from his periodic progress payments a percentage equal to the
percentage of the total contract price used for the advance payment.
4.4. The contractor may reduce his standby letter of credit or guarantee instrument
by the amounts refunded by the Monthly Certificates in the advance payment.
5. PROGRESS PAYMENT
5.1. Once a month, the contractor may submit a statement of work accomplished
(SWA) or progress billing and corresponding request for progress payment for
work accomplished. The SWA should show the amounts which the contractor
considers itself to be entitled to up to the end of the month, to cover (a) the
cumulative value of the works it executed to date, based on the items in the Bill
of Quantities, and (b) adjustments made for approved variation orders executed.
Alternatively, the Procuring Entity may require in the Bidding Documents that
statement of work accomplished or progress billing and the corresponding
request for progress payment may only be submitted upon actual completion of
the infrastructure project or a specific portion, segment, milestone or phase
thereof.122
(a)
5.2. The procuring entity’s representative/project engineer shall check the contractor’s
SWA and certify the amount to be paid to the contractor as progress payment.
Except as otherwise stipulated in the Instruction to Bidders, materials and
equipment delivered on the site but not completely put in place shall not be
included for payment.123
(a)
5.3. The procuring entity shall deduct the following from the certified gross amounts
to be paid to the contractor as progress payment:
a) Cumulative value of the work previously certified and paid for.
b) Portion of the advance payment to be recouped.124
(a)
c) Retention money in accordance with the condition of contract.
d) Amount to cover third party liabilities.
e) Amount to cover uncorrected discovered defects in the works.
6. RETENTION MONEY
6.1. Progress payments are subject to retention of ten percent (10%) referred to as
the "retention money." Such retention shall be based on the total amount due to
the contractor prior to any deduction and shall be retained from every progress
payment until fifty percent (50%) of the value of works, as determined by the
122 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 07-2018, dated 18 May 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August 2018.
123 Ibid.
124 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
137
procuring entity, are completed. If, after fifty percent (50%) completion, the
work is satisfactorily done and on schedule, no additional retention shall be
made; otherwise, the ten percent (10%) retention shall be imposed.
6.2. The total "retention money" shall be due for release upon final acceptance of the
works. The contractor may, however, request the substitution of the retention
money for each progress billing with irrevocable standby letters of credit of from
a commercial bank, bank guarantees or surety bonds callable on demand, of
amounts equivalent to the retention money substituted for and acceptable to
Government, provided that the project is on schedule and is satisfactorily
undertaken. Otherwise, the ten percent (10%) retention shall be made. Said
irrevocable standby letters of credit, bank guarantees and/or surety bonds, to be
posted in favor of the Government shall be valid for a duration to be determined
by the concerned implementing office/agency or procuring entity and will answer
for the purpose for which the ten percent (10%) retention is intended, i.e., to
cover uncorrected discovered defects and third party liabilities.
7. CONTRACT COMPLETION
Once the project reaches an accomplishment of ninety-five (95%) of the total contract
amount, the procuring entity may create an inspectorate team to make preliminary
inspection and submit a punch-list to the contractor in preparation for the final
turnover of the project. Said punch-list will contain, among others, the remaining
works, work deficiencies for necessary corrections, and the specific duration/time to
fully complete the project considering the approved remaining contract time. This,
however, shall not preclude the procuring entity's claim for liquidated damages.
8. NEGATIVE SLIPPAGE125
The Procuring Entity shall ensure the timely implementation of infrastructure projects
by monitoring the performance of the contractors.126
When the contractor incurs negative slippage during the contract duration, the
Procuring Entity shall implement the calibrated measures provided under GPPB Circular
No. 03-2019 dated 8 March 2019, entitled “Guidance on Contract Termination due to
Fifteen Percent (15%) Negative Slippage by the Contractor in Infrastructure
Projects.”127
9. LIQUIDATED DAMAGES
9.1. Once the contract duration expires, including any time extension duly granted,
and128 the contractor refuses or fails to satisfactorily complete the work, the
Procuring Entity shall impose upon the contractor in default liquidated damages.
Liquidated damage is an amount equal129 to at least one tenth (1/10) of one (1)
percent of the cost of the unperformed portion of the works for every day of
delay.
125 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 02-2020, dated 27 February 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 22 April 2020.
126 Ibid.
127 Ibid.
128 Ibid.
129 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
138
9.2. In computing for liquidated damages, the Procuring Entity determines the
usability of the project.130 A project or a portion thereof may be deemed usable
when it starts to provide the desired benefits as certified by the targeted endusers and the concerned Procuring Entity.
9.3. To be entitled to such liquidated damages, the Procuring Entity does not have to
prove that it has incurred actual damages. Such amount shall be deducted from
any money due or which may become due the contractor under the contract or
collect such liquidated damages from the retention money or other securities
posted by the contractor, or a combination thereof,131 whichever is convenient to
the Procuring Entity.
9.4. In case the total sum of liquidated damages reaches ten percent (10%) of the
total contract price, the Procuring Entity has the following options:132
9.4.1. Terminate the contract pursuant to the Guidelines on Termination of
Contract and forfeit the erring contractor’s performance security.
After termination, the Procuring Entity may either (i) take over the
contract; or (ii) resort to any of other alternative methods of
procurement provided under R.A. No. 9184 and its 2016 revised rules
and regulations; or133
9.4.2. Allow the contractor to continue the works without prejudice to the
continued imposition of liquidated damages until the works have been
completed. This does not, however, preclude the Procuring Entity in
resorting to Termination of Contract under Annex I of the 2016
revised IRR of RA No. 9184.134
10. SUSPENSION OF WORK
10.1. The procuring entity shall have the authority to suspend the work wholly or partly
by written order for such period as may be deemed necessary, due to force
majeure or any fortuitous events or for failure on the part of the contractor to
correct bad conditions which are unsafe for workers or for the general public, to
carry out valid orders given by the procuring entity or to perform any provisions
of the contract, or due to adjustment of plans to suit field conditions as found
necessary during construction. The contractor shall immediately comply with
such order to suspend the work wholly or partly.
10.2. The contractor or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to
suspend work operation on any or all projects/activities along the critical path of
activities after fifteen (15) calendar days from date of receipt of written notice
from the contractor to the district engineer/regional director/consultant or
equivalent official, as the case may be, due to the following:
a. There exist right-of-way problems which prohibit the contractor from
performing work in accordance with the approved construction schedule.
130 Ibid.
131 Ibid.
132 Ibid.
133 Ibid.
134 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
139
b. Requisite construction plans which must be owner-furnished are not issued
to the contractor precluding any work called for by such plans.
c. Peace and order conditions make it extremely dangerous, if not possible, to
work. However, this condition must be certified in writing by the Philippine
National Police (PNP) station which has responsibility over the affected area
and confirmed by the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG)
Regional Director.
d. There is failure on the part of the procuring entity to deliver governmentfurnished materials and equipment as stipulated in the contract.
e. Delay in the payment of contractor's claim for progress billing beyond fortyfive (45) calendar days from the time the contractor's claim has been
certified to by the procuring entity’s authorized representative that the
documents are complete unless there are justifiable reasons thereof which
shall be communicated in writing to the contractor.
10.3. In case of total suspension, or suspension of activities along the critical path,
which is not due to any fault of the contractor, the elapsed time between the
effective order of suspending operation and the order to resume work shall be
allowed the contractor by adjusting the contract time accordingly.
11. EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME
11.1. Should the amount of additional work of any kind or other special circumstances
of any kind whatsoever occur such as to fairly entitle the contractor to an
extension of contract time, the procuring entity shall determine the amount of
such extension; provided that the procuring entity is not bound to take into
account any claim for an extension of time unless the contractor has, prior to
the expiration of the contract time and within thirty (30) calendar days after
such work has been commenced or after the circumstances leading to such
claim have arisen, delivered to the procuring entity notices in order that it could
have investigated them at that time. Failure to provide such notice shall
constitute a waiver by the contractor of any claim. Upon receipt of full and
detailed particulars, the procuring entity shall examine the facts and extent of
the delay and shall extend the contract time completing the contract work when,
in the procuring entity's opinion, the findings of facts justify an extension.
11.2. No extension of contract time shall be granted the contractor due to (a) ordinary
unfavorable weather conditions and (b) inexcusable failure or negligence of
contractor to provide the required equipment, supplies or materials.
11.3. Extension of contract time may be granted only when the affected activities fall
within the critical path of the PERT/CPM network.
11.4. No extension of contract time shall be granted when the reason given to support
the request for extension was already considered in the determination of the
original contract time during the conduct of detailed engineering and in the
preparation of the contract documents as agreed upon by the parties before
contract perfection.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
140
11.5. Extension of contract time shall be granted for rainy/unworkable days
considered unfavorable for the prosecution of the works at the site, based on
the actual conditions obtained at the site, in excess of the number of
rainy/unworkable days pre-determined by the government in relation to the
original contract time during the conduct of detailed engineering and in the
preparation of the contract documents as agreed upon by the parties before
contract perfection, and/or for equivalent period of delay due to major
calamities such as exceptionally destructive typhoons, floods and earthquakes,
and epidemics, and for causes such as non-delivery on time of materials,
working drawings, or written information to be furnished by the procuring
entity, non-acquisition of permit to enter private properties within the right-ofway resulting in complete paralization of construction activities, and other
meritorious causes as determined by the Government's authorized Engineer and
approved by the procuring entity. Shortage of construction materials, general
labor strikes, and peace and order problems that disrupt construction operations
through no fault of the contractor may be considered as additional grounds for
extension of contract time provided they are publicly felt and certified by
appropriate government agencies such as DTI, DOLE, DILG, and DND, among
others. The written consent of bondsmen must be attached to any request of
the contractor for extension of contract time and submitted to the procuring
entity for consideration and the validity of the performance security shall be
correspondingly extended.
12. ACCREDITATION OF TESTING LABORATORIES
12.1. To help ensure the quality of materials being used in infrastructure projects, the
Bureau of Research and Standards (BRS) of the DPWH, Department of Science
and Technology (DOST), or Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) shall
accredit, in accordance with industry guidelines, the testing laboratories whose
services are engaged or to be engaged in infrastructure projects. All
government infrastructure project owners must accept results of material test(s)
coming only from DOST/BRS accredited laboratories.
13. EVALUATION OF CONTRACTORS PERFORMANCE
13.1. Subject and Scope
All Procuring Entities implementing government infrastructure projects are
mandated to evaluate the performance of their contractors using the NEDAApproved Constructors Performance Evaluation System (CPES) Guidelines for
the type of project being implemented. These guidelines cover all infrastructure
projects awarded by the government regardless of contract amount and funding
source. CPES evaluation shall be done during construction and upon completion
of each government project. To ensure continuous implementation of CPES, all
Procuring Entities concerned are required to include in their Projects’
Engineering and Administrative Overhead Cost the budget for the
implementation of CPES pursuant to NEDA Board Resolution No. 18 (s. 2002).
13.2. Evaluation Guidelines
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “E”
141
For project types which do not have specific CPES Guidelines, the Procuring
Entities concerned may formulate and adopt their own implementing Guidelines
specific to their needs provided the NEDA-INFRACOM poses no objections to
their adoption, and provided further that said Guidelines are made known to all
prospective bidders.
13.3. Implementation Mechanism for CPES
All Procuring Entities implementing infrastructure projects are required to
establish CPES Implementing Units (IUs) in their respective
offices/agencies/corporations. The CPES Implementing Units shall be
responsible for the implementation of the CPES Implementing guidelines,
including but not limited to, the supervision of Constructors Performance
Evaluators (CPEs) to be accredited by the Construction Industry Authority of the
Philippines (CIAP). The procuring entity’s CPES IU shall be responsible for the
following: a) pre-screening of applications of CPEs, b) funding for CPEs
accreditation training and seminars; and c) yearly evaluation of CPEs.
13.4. Submission and Dissemination of Evaluation Results
All Procuring Entities implementing CPES shall submit the results of their
performance evaluation to the CIAP on a monthly basis or as often as
necessary. The procuring entity’s CPES-IU shall likewise develop and maintain a
databank and disseminate the CPES reports to the concerned units/departments
within the procuring entity and to other interested users.
13.5. Utilization of Evaluation Results
The CIAP shall consolidate all of the CPES evaluation results received and shall
disseminate the same to all Procuring Entities concerned. The CPES rating and
other information shall be used by the concerned government agencies for the
following purposes: (a) pre-qualification/eligibility screening of constructors; (b)
awarding of contracts; (c) project monitoring and control; (d) issuance of
Certificate of Completion; (e) policy formulation/review; (f) industry planning;
(g) granting of Incentives/Awards, and, in adopting measure to further improve
performance of contractors in the prosecution of government projects.
14. OTHER RULES AND GUIDELINES
The rules and regulations for the other aspects of contract implementation shall be
included in the manuals to be issued by the GPPB, such as, but not limited to, the
following:
a) Sub-contracting;
b) Interference with Traffic and Adjoining Properties;
c) Clearance of Project Site of Obstruction;
d) Inspection and Testing;
e) Daywork;
f) Measurement of Works; and
g) Other Implementation Aspects.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “F”
142
ANNEX “F”
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
CONSULTING SERVICES
1. Advance Payment for Mobilization
The Government, as it considers fair and reasonable, may allow advance payment to
the Consultant in the amount which shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
contract amount to cover the cost of mobilization, subject to the posting of an
irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by an entity acceptable to the agency and of
an amount equal to the advance payment. The advance payment shall be repaid by
the Consultant by deducting from his progress payments such sum as agreed upon
during the contract negotiations until fully liquidated within the duration of the
contract.
2. Cost of Consulting Services
All Consultancy contracts shall be fixed price contracts. Any extension of contract time
shall not involve any additional cost.
3. Other Rules and Guidelines
The rules and regulations for the other aspects of contract implementation shall be
included in the manuals to be issued by the GPPB.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
143
ANNEX “G”
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF CONTRACTS
FOR DESIGN AND BUILD INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
1. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall govern the procurement and implementation of contracts for
design and build infrastructure projects and shall supplement applicable provisions of
Republic Act No. 9184 (RA 9184) and its Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
(IRR) in particular Section 17.6 and Annex E.
2. PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to determine the conditions for the use of the design
and build scheme for infrastructure projects and the procedures for the
implementation thereof.
3. GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The procuring entity, prior to resorting to the design and build scheme, should
consider the following advantages and disadvantages of said scheme:
3.1. Advantages:
a) Since both design and construction are in the hands of the contractor, there
is a single point of responsibility for quality, cost, and schedule adherence,
including the risks related to design. This precludes buck-passing and
finger-pointing between the designer and the builder.
b) Because design and construction periods can overlap, the total design and
construction time, as well as the final project cost, will be significantly
reduced.
c) The procuring entity is assured of quality considering that the larger
responsibility implicit in the design-build scheme serves as motivation for
high quality of the facility to be provided. Once the requirements of the
procuring entity are defined in performance terms, the designer-builder is
responsible for producing the results accordingly. The designer-builder
warrants to the procuring entity that the design documents are complete
and free from error.
d) The procuring entity does not need to spend much time and money in
seeing to it that the work is done by the contractor exactly as indicated by
the design documents prepared by the designer, and in coordinating and
arbitrating between separate design and construction contracts.
3.2. Disadvantages:
a) Procuring Entities should, however, take into account that in utilizing the
design and build scheme for a particular project, contractors are given too
much discretion in determining the project cost and there is difficulty in
predicting its final cost until the actual commencement of construction.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
144
This, however, can be addressed by prescribing that the bid/contract price
should not exceed the Approved Budget for Contract (ABC) of the procuring
entity and that the contract price is a fixed lump sum amount.
b) Considering that the extent of the integration of design and construction of
the project is exceptionally dependent on the contractor, there may be
cases when the end-result may not be exactly in accordance with what the
procuring entity has required. These cases can be avoided if the procuring
entity adequately defines the output or performance specifications and
parameters.
4. DEFINITION OF TERMS
a. Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC). This shall be a lump sum amount
that shall cover the cost of design and construction works (at the option of the
procuring entity) based on the conceptual design and performance specifications
and in accordance with applicable provisions of the law or agency guidelines.
The ABC shall be calculated based on either the approximate quantities of work
of the conceptual design, from standardized designs or from cost records of
previous projects of similar kind.
b. Bidding Documents for Design and Build Scheme. These shall basically be
similar to the Bidding Documents for infrastructure projects and shall also
include the performance specifications and parameters to be followed by the
design and build contractors and the method for allocation of risks for the design
and build contract, among others.
c. Conceptual Design. This shall describe the general idea of the procuring entity
with regard to the completed facility and shall identify the scope or physical
components and structures, specific outputs and requirements of the structures
and proposed methods of construction, where necessary.
d. Design and Build Projects. This refers to infrastructure projects where the
procuring entity awards a single contract for the architectural/engineering design
and construction to a single firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or
consortium.
e. Performance Specifications and Parameters. The procuring entity shall
define the required performance specifications and criteria and its means of
measurement based on the operating outputs and in accordance with
appropriate design and construction standards, legal and technical obligations
and any other relevant government commitments as required by existing laws
and regulations. It shall not be drawn up to favor a particular solution, design
and construction method.
f. Preliminary Investigations. These shall include, among others, information
on soil, geotechnical, hydrologic, hydraulic, seismic, traffic, and environmental
conditions that shall be used to define project design criteria, to set the basis for
any changed conditions and establish preliminary project cost estimates.
g. Preliminary Survey and Mapping. These shall determine boundaries and
provide stationing along control lines to establish feature and design criteria
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
145
location, and identify existing and future right-of-way limits and construction
easements associated with the procuring entity’s conceptual design.
h. Project Description. This shall define the objectives, purpose, limitations or
constraints, as well as the allocation of risks between the procuring entity and
the winning bidder.
i. Utility Locations. The procuring entity shall provide information on existing
utilities in and around the project’s area.
5. CONDITIONS FOR THE USE OF THE DESIGN AND BUILD SCHEME
5.1. The Design and Build scheme shall be applied under any of the following cases:
a. For flagship, priority and fast track projects that need to be completed on a
tight completion schedule, as included in the Medium-Term Public
Investment Program (MTPIP) for national projects and in the Regional
Development Investment Plan (RDIP) for regional and provincial projects;
b. For infrastructure projects requiring advanced engineering or construction
technologies or whose intellectual property rights belong to private
companies;
c. For infrastructure projects where design, equipment, plant and construction
can be provided exclusively by a company or where manufacturer’s knowhow is important in the construction of such facility; or
d. For small projects where there are previously approved drawings or
standardized designs and an innovation in design and construction methods
under the design and build scheme will result in lower costs and higher
quality projects. Examples of these are school buildings, rural health units,
among others.
5.2. All design and build projects shall be included in the Annual Procurement Plan
(APP) of the procuring entity concerned and shall be subject to prior approval
by the Head of the Procuring Entity or his/her duly authorized representative.
6. CREATION OF DESIGN and BUILD COMMITTEE
The procuring entity may create a Design and Build Committee (DBC) composed of
highly technical personnel experienced in the field of architecture, engineering and
construction in the particular type of project to be bid. The DBC shall assist the project
management office (PMO) in the preparation of the conceptual design and
performance specifications and parameters, review of detailed engineering design and
supervision of the project. It shall, likewise, assist the Bids and Awards Committee
(BAC) and the Technical Working Group (TWG) in the evaluation of technical proposals
in accordance with the criteria set in the Bidding Documents.
7. PRELIMINARY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STUDIES
No bidding and award of design and build contracts shall be made unless the required
preliminary design and construction studies have been sufficiently carried out and duly
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
146
approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity that shall include, among others, the
following:
i. Project Description
ii. Conceptual Design
iii. Performance Specifications and Parameters
iv. Preliminary Survey and Mapping
v. Preliminary Investigations
vi. Utility Locations
vii. Approved Budget for the Contract
viii. Proposed Design and Construction Schedule
ix. Minimum requirements for a Construction Safety and Health Program for the
project being considered
x. Tender/Bidding Documents, including Instructions to Bidders and Conditions
of Contract
The above data are for reference only. The procuring entity does not guarantee that
these data are fully correct, up to date, and applicable to the project at hand. The
contractor is responsible for the accuracy and applicability of all data, including the
above, that it will use in its design and build proposal and services.
The acquisition of right-of-way and the conduct of eminent domain proceedings shall
still be the responsibility of the procuring entity, which shall include a preliminary
budget for this purpose.
8. DETAILED ENGINEERING REQUIREMENTS
8.1. Upon award of the design and build contract, the winning bidder shall be
responsible for the preparation and submission of all necessary detailed
engineering investigations, surveys and designs in accordance with the
provisions of Annex “A” of this IRR (with the exception of the Bidding
Documents and the ABC).
8.2. The procuring entity shall ensure that all the necessary schedules with regard
to the submission, confirmation and approval of the detailed engineering design
and the details of the construction methods and procedures shall be included in
the contract documents.
8.3. The procuring entity shall review, order rectification, and approve or disapprove
– for implementation only - the submitted plans within these schedules. All
instructions for rectification shall be in writing stating the reasons for such
rectification. The design and build contractor shall be solely responsible for the
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
147
integrity of the detailed engineering design and the performance of the
structure irrespective of the approval/confirmation by the procuring entity.
9. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
9.1. The eligibility requirements for Design and Build infrastructure projects shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 23 to 24 of IRR.
9.2. A modified set of requirements integrating eligibility documents and criteria for
infrastructure projects and consulting services shall be adopted, as follows:
i. Class “A” Documents (Legal, Technical and Financial Documents) and
Class “B” Documents
The prospective bidder shall submit all the required Class “A” and Class
“B” documents for infrastructure projects and the following:
a) relevant statements of all on-going, completed, awarded but not
yet started design/design and build related contracts, curriculum
vitae of key staff, partners or principal officers; and
b) valid licenses issued by the Professional Regulatory Commission
(PRC) for design professionals. (a)
ii. Eligibility Criteria
a) The eligibility of design and build contractors shall be based on
the legal, technical and financial requirements abovementioned.
In the technical requirements, the design and build contractor (as
solo or in joint venture/consortia) should be able to comply with
the experience requirement under the IRR of R.A. 9184, where
one of the parties (in a joint venture/consortia) should have at
least one similar project, both in design and construction, with at
least 50% of the cost of the ABC.
b) If the bidder has no experience in design and build projects on its
own it may enter into subcontracting, partnerships, or joint
venture with design or engineering firms for the design portion of
the contract.
c) The relevant provisions under Section 23.4.2 of the IRR of R.A,
9184 on eligibility requirements shall be observed, with the
following exceptions:
Joint ventures/consortia among Filipino contractors and consultants or
among Filipino contractors and foreign consultants shall be allowed
subject to pertinent laws and the relevant provisions of the IRR of R.A.
9184. The joint venture/consortia shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the obligations and the civil liabilities arising from the
design and build contract: Provided, however, That Filipino ownership or
interest thereof shall be at least seventy five percent (75%): Provided
further, That joint ventures/consortia in which Filipino ownership or
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
148
interest is less than seventy-five percent (75%) may be eligible where
the structures to be built require the application of techniques and/or
technologies which are not adequately possessed by Filipinos and that
Filipino ownership or interest shall not be less than twenty-five percent
(25%): Provided, finally, that when the design services in which the joint
venture wishes to engage involve the practice of professions regulated
by law, all those who will actually perform the services shall be Filipino
citizens and registered professionals authorized by the appropriate
regulatory body to practice those professions and allied professions and
where foreign designers are required, the foreign designer must be
authorized by the appropriate Philippine Government professional
regulatory body to engage in the practice of those professions and allied
professions.
10. SUBMISSION AND RECEIPT OF BIDS
10.1. In the submission of bids, the first envelope (Technical Proposal) shall contain
all the required documents for infrastructure projects under Section 25.2(b) of
the IRR of R.A 9184 and the following additional documents:
i. Preliminary Conceptual Design Plans in accordance with the degree of
details specified by the procuring entity;
ii. Design and construction methods;
iii. List of design and construction personnel, to be assigned to the contract
to be bid, with their complete qualification and experience data; and
iv. Value engineering analysis of design and construction method.
10.2. The second envelope (Financial Proposal) shall contain all the required
documents for infrastructure projects under Section 25.3 of the IRR of R.A
9184 and the following additional documents:
i. Lump sum bid prices, which shall include the detailed engineering cost,
in the prescribed Bid Form;
ii. Detailed estimates including a summary sheet indicating the unit prices
of construction materials, labor rates and equipment rentals used in
coming up with the bid; and
iii. Cash flow by the quarter and payments schedule.
11. BID EVALUATION
For the detailed evaluation of the design and build proposals a two-step procedure
shall be adopted by the BAC, which may be undertaken with the assistance of the
DBC.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
149
11.1. First-Step Procedure:
i. The first step of the evaluation shall involve the review of the
preliminary conceptual designs and track record submitted by the
contractor as indicated in the Bidding Documents using a nondiscretionary “pass/fail” criteria that involve compliance with the
following requirements:
a. Adherence of preliminary design plans to the required
performance specifications and parameters and degree of details;
b. Concept of approach and methodology for detailed engineering,
design and construction with emphasis on the clarity, feasibility,
innovativeness and comprehensiveness of the plan approach, and
the quality of interpretation of project problems, risks, and
suggested solutions;
c. Quality of personnel to be assigned to the project which covers
suitability of key staff to perform the duties of the particular
assignments and general qualifications and competence including
education and training of the key staff;
ii. For complex or unique undertakings, such as those involving highly
specialized or advanced engineering technology, eligible bidders may be
required, at the option of the agency concerned, to make an oral
presentation within fifteen (15) calendar days after the deadline for
submission of technical proposals.
11.2. Second-Step Procedure:
Only those bids that passed the above criteria shall be subjected to the
second step of evaluation.
The BAC shall open the financial proposal of each “passed” bidder and shall
evaluate it using non-discretionary criteria - including arithmetical corrections
for computational errors - as stated in the Bidding Documents, and thus
determine the correct total calculated bid prices. The BAC shall automatically
disqualify any total calculated bid price which exceeds the ABC. The total
calculated bid prices (not exceeding the ABC) shall be ranked, in ascending
order, from lowest to highest. The bid with the lowest total calculated bid
price shall be identified as the Lowest Calculated Bid (LCB).
12. POST-QUALIFICATION and AWARD OF THE CONTRACT
12.1. The LCB shall be subject to post-qualification in accordance with Section 34,
Rule X of this IRR to determine its responsiveness to the eligibility and bid
requirements. If after post-qualification the Lowest Calculated Bid is
determined to be post-qualified it shall be considered the Lowest Calculated
and Responsive Bid (LCRB) and the contract shall be awarded to the bidder.
In case of post-disqualification of the LCB, the procedure under Section 34
shall also be followed.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
150
12.2. The Head of the Procuring Entity shall approve or disapprove the
recommendations of the BAC within a period not exceeding fifteen (15)
calendar days from the determination and declaration by the BAC of the
LCRB.
12.3. The Head of the Procuring Entity concerned shall award the contract to the
said bidder pursuant to the provisions of Section 37, Rule XI of this IRR.
13. CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION
As a rule, contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of infrastructure
projects shall comply with Annex “E” of this IRR. The following provisions shall
supplement these procedures:
13.1. No works shall commence unless the contractor has submitted the required
documentary requirements and the procuring entity has given written
approval. Work execution shall be in accordance with reviewed and approved
documents.
13.2. The contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary information as
to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may affect the works
and shall prepare and submit all necessary documents specified by the
procuring entity to meet all regulatory approvals as specified in the contract
documents.
13.3. The Contractor shall submit a detailed program of work within fourteen (14)
calendar days after the issuance of the Notice to Proceed for approval by the
procuring entity that shall include, among others:
i. The order in which it intends to carry out the work including
anticipated timing for each stage of design/detailed engineering and
construction;
ii. Periods for review of specific outputs and any other submissions and
approvals;
iii. Sequence of timing for inspections and tests as specified in the
contract documents;
iv. General description of the design and construction methods to be
adopted;
v. Number and names of personnel to be assigned for each stage of the
work;
vi. List of equipment required on site for each major stage of the work;
and
vii. Description of the quality control system to be utilized for the project.
13.4. Any errors, omissions, inconsistencies, inadequacies or failure submitted by
the contractor that do not comply with the requirements shall be rectified,
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
151
resubmitted and reviewed at the contractor’s cost. If the Contractor wishes to
modify any design or document which has been previously submitted,
reviewed and approved, the contractor shall notify the procuring entity within
a reasonable period of time and shall shoulder the cost of such changes.
13.5. As a rule, changes in design and construction requirements shall be limited
only to those that have not been anticipated in the contract documents prior
to contract signing and approval. The following guidelines shall govern
approval for change or variation orders:
i. Change Orders resulting from design errors, omissions or nonconformance with the performance specifications and parameters and
the contract documents by the contractor shall be implemented by the
contractor at no additional cost to the procuring entity.
ii. Provided that the contractor suffers delay and/or incurs costs due to
changes or errors in the procuring entity’s performance specifications
and parameters, he shall be entitled to either one of the following:
a. an extension of time for any such delays under Section 10 of
Annex “E”; or
b. payment for such costs as specified in the contract documents,
provided, that the cumulative amount of the variation order does
not exceed ten percent (10%) of the original contract price.
13.6. The contract documents shall include the manner and schedule of payment
specifying the estimated contract amount and installments in which the
contract price will be paid.
13.7. The contractor shall be entitled to advance payment subject to the provisions
of Section 4 of Annex “E”.
13.8. The procuring entity shall define the quality control procedures for the design
and construction in accordance with agency guidelines and shall issue the
proper certificates of acceptance for sections of the works or the whole of the
works as provided for in the contract documents.
13.9. The contractor shall provide all necessary equipment, personnel, instruments,
documents and others to carry out specified tests.
13.10. All design and build projects shall have a minimum Defects Liability Period of
one (1) year after contract completion or as provided for in the contract
documents. This is without prejudice, however, to the liabilities imposed upon
the engineer/architect who drew up the plans and specification for a building
sanctioned under Article 1723 of the New Civil Code of the Philippines.
13.11. The contractor shall be held liable for design and structural defects and/or
failure of the completed project within the warranty periods specified in
Section 62.2.3.2 of the IRR.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “G”
152
14. AMENDMENTS AND FORMS
In the implementation of these guidelines, the GPPB may issue additional guidelines
or introduce modifications thereto through the amendment of its specific provisions
as the need arises, as well as, formulate, approve and disseminate standard Bidding
Documents, forms and evaluation documents, whenever necessary.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
153
ANNEX “H”
CONSOLIDATED GUIDELINES FOR THE ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF
PROCUREMENT
I. POLICY STATEMENT
As a general rule, all procurement shall be through Competitive Bidding. However,
whenever justified by the conditions provided in Republic Act No. (R.A.) 9184 and its
revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), the Procuring Entity may, in order to
promote economy and efficiency, resort to any of the alternative methods of
procurement provided in Rule XVI of the IRR of R.A. 9184.
The Alternative Methods of Procurement shall be resorted to only in the highly
exceptional cases provided for in this Guidelines and subject to the prior approval of the
Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) upon recommendation of the Bids and Awards
Committee (BAC). In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the most
advantageous price for the Government is obtained.
II. PURPOSE
This Guidelines is formulated by the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) to
provide a single source of information for Alternative Methods of Procurement
commonly resorted to by procuring entities; and to prescribe the terms, conditions,
rules and procedures for covered Alternative Methods of Procurement for Goods,
Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting Services.
III. SCOPE
This Guidelines shall apply to the national government, its branches, constitutional
offices, departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state universities and
colleges, government-owned and/or -controlled corporations, government financial
institutions, and local government units.
Excluded from this Guidelines are the following:
A. Infrastructure projects undertaken through the Armed Forces of the Philippines
Corps of Engineers (AFPCOE), for purposes of Sections 53.2 (Emergency Cases)
and 53.5 (Agency-to-Agency) of the IRR of R.A. 9184, which shall continue to be
governed by the Guidelines on the Implementation of Infrastructure Projects
Undertaken by the AFP Corps of Engineers under GPPB Resolution No. 09-2005.
B. Limited Source Bidding under Section 49, Negotiated Procurement under Sections
53.8 (Defense Cooperation Agreement), 53.11 (NGO Participation), 53.12
(Community Participation), and 53.13 (UN Agencies).
IV. GENERAL GUIDELINES
A. Annual Procurement Plan (APP). The method of procurement, e.g.,
competitive bidding or any of the alternative methods of procurement, to be
utilized by the Procuring Entity shall be indicated in the APP to be approved by the
HOPE. If the original mode of procurement in the APP cannot be ultimately
pursued, the BAC assisted by its Secretariat, the Technical Working Group, and by
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
154
the appropriate End-User or relevant office, as the case may be, shall justify and
recommend through a BAC Resolution such change in the mode of procurement
to be approved by the HOPE. The changes must be reflected in the APP and
submitted to the GPPB in accordance with Section 7.4 of the IRR of R.A. 9184.
B. Prohibition on Splitting of Government Contracts.135 Splitting of
Government Contracts, which means the division or breaking up of government
contracts into smaller quantities and amounts, or dividing contract implementation
into artificial phases or sub-contracts for the purpose of evading or circumventing
the requirements of R.A. 9184 and its IRR, particularly the necessity of
competitive bidding and the requirements for the alternative methods of
procurement, is prohibited.
For infrastructure projects to be implemented by phases, the Procuring Entity
shall ensure that there is a clear delineation of work for each phase, which must
be usable and structurally sound. It shall also ensure the conduct of the detailed
engineering activities for each phase as provided for in Annex “A” of the IRR of
R.A. 9184.
C. Unnecessary, Excessive, Extravagant and Unconscionable Expenditures.
The Procuring Entity shall ensure that the objectives and purpose of the contract
do not constitute an unnecessary, excessive, extravagant, or unconscionable
expenditure.
D. Confidentiality of Bidding Documents. The procurement documents are
strictly confidential and shall not be divulged or released to any person prior to
the advertisement or posting of the procurement opportunity, except to those
officially authorized in the handling of these documents.
However, in procurements involving and affecting national security, the disclosure
of procurement documents shall be dependent upon the HOPE having due regard
to the nature, classification, sensitivity and confidentiality of the relevant
documents vis-à-vis the purpose and reason for the request.
E. Advertisement and Posting of Procurement Opportunity.136 For alternative
methods of procurement, the Procuring Entity may dispense with the
advertisement in the newspaper and posting requirement as prescribed in Section
21.2.1 of the IRR of R.A. 9184.
For the following alternative methods, however, the BAC, through its Secretariat,
shall post the procurement opportunity [e.g., Request for Quotation (RFQ) or
Request for Proposal (RFP)] in the Philippine Government Electronic Procurement
System (PhilGEPS) website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if
available, and at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises
of the Procuring Entity for a period of at least three (3) calendar days:
1) Section 52.1(b) – Shopping for ordinary office supplies and equipment
not available in the Department of Budget and Management-Procurement
Service (DBM-PS), for projects with Approved Budget for the Contract
(ABC) above Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000.00);
135 Section 54.1, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
136 Section 54.2, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
155
2) Section 53.1 – Two Failed Biddings; and
3) Section 53.9 – Small Value Procurement, for projects with ABC above
Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000.00);
F. Documentary Requirements. The mandatory documents to be submitted by
suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, contractors and consultants are
enumerated in Appendix A of this Guidelines.
In the case of Negotiated Procurement through Emergency Cases under Section
53.2 of the 2016 IRR of RA No. 9184, PEs are allowed to accept: (i) an expired
Business or Mayor's permit with Official Receipt of renewal application, subject to
submission of the Business or Mayor's permit after award of contract; and (ii) an
unnotarized Omnibus Sworn Statement subject to compliance therewith after
award of contract.137
G. PhilGEPS Registration.138 Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors,
and/or consultants are mandated to register with the PhilGEPS and provide a
PhilGEPS Registration number in the following alternative methods of
procurement as a condition for award of the contract:
1) Section 50 – Direct Contracting;
2) Section 52.1(b) – Shopping for ordinary office supplies and equipment
not available in DBM-PS;
3) Section 53.3 – Take Over of Contracts (Only for New Bidders, if any.);
4) Section 53.6 – Scientific, Scholarly or Artistic Work, Exclusive Technology
and Media Services;
5) Section 53.7 – Highly Technical Consultants;
6) Section 53.9 – Small Value Procurement; and
7) Section 53.10 – Lease of Real Property and Venue.
H. Observers. For Negotiated Procurement under Section 53.1 (Two-Failed
Biddings), observers shall be invited in accordance with Section 13 of the IRR of
R.A. 9184. For other alternative methods of procurement, observers may be
invited by the Procuring Entity as it may deem necessary.
I. Reference to Brand Names.139 Specifications for the procurement of Goods
shall be based on relevant characteristics, functionality and/or performance
requirements. Reference to brand names shall not be allowed except for items or
parts that are compatible with the existing fleet or equipment of the same make
137 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 05-2020, dated 20 March 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 24 March
2020.
138 Section 54.6, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
139 Section 18, R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
156
and brand and will maintain the performance, functionality and useful life of the
equipment. This rule shall also apply to the goods component of infrastructure
projects and consulting services.
J. Delegation of Authority. The conduct of Shopping and Negotiated Procurement
under Emergency Cases, Small Value Procurement and Lease of Real Property and
Venue may be delegated to the End-user unit or any other appropriate bureau,
committee, or support unit duly authorized by the BAC through a Resolution
approved by the HOPE.
For Shopping under Section 52.1(a) due to the urgent nature of the attendant
circumstances, the BAC and the HOPE through a Resolution and issuance for the
purpose,140 respectively, may delegate to specific officials, personnel, committee
or office in the Procuring Entity the conduct of Shopping and award of contract to
efficiently and expeditiously deal with the emergency sought to be addressed. (a)
For Negotiated Procurement under Section 53.14, the BAC and the HOPE through
a Resolution and issuance for the purpose, respectively, shall delegate to specific
officials, personnel, committee or office in the Procuring Entity the conduct of
Direct Retail Purchase to efficiently and expeditiously deal with the pressing need
sought to be addressed. (n)
For Negotiated Procurement under Emergency Cases under Section 53.2, the
HoPE, through an issuance for the purpose, may delegate to either the BAC or the
End-user unit or any other appropriate bureau, committee, support or procuring
unit the authority to directly negotiate with a legally, technically, and financially
capable supplier, contractor, or consultant.141
The HoPE may also delegate the awarding of contract under Negotiated
Procurement (Emergency Cases) under Section 53.2 to any official of the
procuring entity except to the BAC Chairperson or members pursuant to Section
11.2.5 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184 and other associated issuances or
to any other official where there exists conflict of interest, such as those to whom
the HoPE has delegated the authority to directly negotiate under the foregoing
modality.142
For record and monitoring purposes, all awards shall be immediately reported
with all supporting documents to the HOPE, through the BAC, to ensure
compliance with all the conditions and requirements provided for under R.A. 9184,
its IRR and related guidelines.
K. Mandatory Review. The BAC shall conduct a mandatory review and evaluation
of the terms, conditions, specifications, cost estimates in the RFQ or RFP, if none
or less than the required number of quotations or proposals are received, despite
the extension of deadline for the third time.
Based on its findings, the BAC may revise the terms and conditions and
specifications, and if necessary, adjust the ABC, subject to the required approvals,
140 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 24-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
141 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2020, dated 9 March 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 13 March
2020.
142 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
157
and repeat the procurement process.
L. Notice of Award; Contact Approval; Notice to Proceed.
1) Except in Shopping, and Negotiated Procurement through Emergency Cases,
Agency-to-Agency and Small Value Procurement, the following procedures
shall apply in the issuance of the Notice of Award (NOA), Contract/Purchase
Order (PO) and Notice to Proceed (NTP) for the Alternative Methods of
Procurement identified in this Guidelines, thus:
a. The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract. Within a
period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days from receipt, the HOPE
shall approve or disapprove the BAC’s recommendation. In case of
approval, the HOPE shall immediately issue the NOA to the Supplier,
Contractor or Consultant. In the event the HOPE shall disapprove the
recommendation, such disapproval shall be based only on valid,
reasonable, and justifiable grounds to be expressed in writing, addressed
to the BAC.
b. The Supplier, Contractor or Consultant shall immediately enter into
contract with the Procuring Entity upon receipt of the NOA. Upon
transmission of the signed contract/PO, the HOPE or his duly authorized
representative shall immediately sign the contract/PO provided that all the
relevant documentary requirements are submitted.
c. The HOPE or his duly authorized representative shall issue the NTP, if
necessary, and a copy of the approved contract to the Supplier,
Contractor or Consultant within three (3) calendar days from the date of
approval of the contract by the appropriate government approving
authority.
2) Posting of Notice of Award, Contract and Notice to Proceed.143 Unless
the contract involves and affects national security as determined by the HOPE
in accordance with Section IV(D) of this Guidelines, the BAC, through its
Secretariat, shall post the NOA, Contract/PO, including the NTP if necessary,
for information purposes, in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the
Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous place
reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity within ten
(10) days from their issuance, except for contracts with ABC of Fifty
Thousand Pesos (₱50,000.00) and below.
M.Bid, Performance and Warranty Securities.144
Bid security may be dispensed with. However, performance and/or warranty
securities are required for the following alternative methods of procurement, in
accordance with Sections 39 and 62 of the IRR as summarized below:
Alternative Method of
Procurement
Performance Security
(PS)
Warranty Security
(WS)
Direct Contracting X 
143 Section 54.3, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
144 Sections 54.4 and 54.5, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
158
Alternative Method of
Procurement
Performance Security
(PS)
Warranty Security
(WS)
Repeat Order X 
Two-Failed Biddings  
In no case shall WS be
required in the
procurement of
Consulting Services.
Emergency Cases Procuring Entity may
require PS depending on
the nature of the
procurement project.
However, for
Infrastructure Projects,
PS is required.
Procuring Entity may
require WS depending on
the nature of the
procurement project.
In no case shall WS be
required in the
procurement of
Consulting Services.
Take-over of Contracts  
Adjacent/Contiguous  For Infrastructure
Projects, WS is required.
Small Value Procurement Procuring Entity may
require PS depending on
the nature of the
procurement project.
However, for
Infrastructure Projects,
PS is required.
Procuring Entity may
require WS depending on
the nature of the
procurement project.
In no case shall WS be
required in the
procurement of
Consulting Services.
N. Blacklisting. Suspension or blacklisting of suppliers, contractors, or consultants
shall be made in accordance with the Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of
Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors, and Consultants. A suspended
or blacklisted supplier, contractor or consultant shall not be allowed to participate
in all procurement opportunities of the government for the duration of the
suspension or blacklisting, regardless of the modality of procurement employed by
the Procuring Entity.
V. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES
A. DIRECT CONTRACTING145
1. Definition. Direct Contracting or single source procurement is a method of
procurement of goods that does not require elaborate Bidding Documents. The
supplier is simply asked to submit a price quotation or a pro-forma invoice
together with the conditions of sale. The offer may be accepted immediately or
after some negotiations. Direct Contracting may be resorted to under any of the
following conditions:
a) Procurement of goods of proprietary nature which can be obtained only
from the proprietary source, i.e., when patents, trade secrets, and
copyrights prohibit others from manufacturing the same item;
145 Section 50, R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
159
b) When the procurement of critical components from a specific supplier is a
condition precedent to hold a contractor to guarantee its project
performance, in accordance with the provisions of its contract; or
c) Those sold by an exclusive dealer or manufacturer which does not have
sub-dealers selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can
be obtained at more advantageous terms to the government.
To justify the need to procure through the Direct Contracting method, the EndUser should conduct a survey of the industry and determine the supply source. In
all cases where Direct Contracting is contemplated, the survey must be
conducted prior to the commencement of the procurement process. Moreover,
the End-User must justify the necessity for an item that may only be procured
through Direct Contracting, and it must be able to prove that there is no suitable
substitute in the market that can be obtained at more advantageous terms.
2. Procedure
a) The BAC shall prepare the RFQ or pro-forma invoice together with the
terms and conditions of sale, and shall send the same to the identified
direct supplier.
b) Simplified negotiations on the terms and conditions of the contract may be
conducted by the BAC to ensure that the supplier is technically, legally and
financially capable to deliver the goods at the most advantageous price and
contract for the Government.
c) The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of
the supplier. Award of contract shall be made in accordance with Section
IV(L) of this Guidelines.
B. REPEAT ORDER146
1. Definition. Repeat Order is a method of procurement of goods from the
previous winning bidder, whenever there is a need to replenish goods subject to
the following conditions:
a) The goods were procured under a contract previously awarded through
Competitive Bidding;
b) Unit prices must be the same as or lower than those in the original
contract, provided that such prices are still the most advantageous to the
government after price verification;
c) The repeat order will not result in splitting of contracts, requisitions, or
purchase orders, as provided for in Article IV(B) of this Guidelines;
d) Except in cases duly approved by the GPPB, repeat orders shall be availed
of only within six (6) months from the date of the NTP arising from the
146 Section 51, R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
160
original contract, provided that there has been a partial delivery, inspection
and acceptance of the goods within the same period;
e) Repeat orders shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the quantity of
each item in the original contract. In order not to exceed the 25%
threshold, the goods under the original contract must be:
i. Quantifiable;
ii. Divisible; and
iii. Consisting of at least four (4) units per item.
2. Procedure
a) Upon determination of the need to replenish the goods earlier procured
through competitive bidding, the End-User unit shall prepare the necessary
Purchase Request for the procurement of additional goods, after a careful
study and confirmation of the prevailing market price of the goods to be reordered and comparing this with the price of the goods in the original
contract, accompanied by the appropriate justification why the re-ordering
is being pursued.
b) When all the conditions are present, the BAC shall recommend to the HOPE
the award of contract through Repeat Order. Award of contract shall be
made in accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.
C. SHOPPING147
1. Definition. Shopping is a method of procurement of goods whereby the
Procuring Entity simply requests for the submission of price quotations for readily
available off-the-shelf goods or ordinary/regular equipment to be procured
directly from suppliers of known qualifications. This method of procurement shall
be employed in any of the following cases:
a) When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase,
the amount shall not exceed the following:
i. For NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional
Government, Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (₱200,000)
ii. For LGUs, in accordance with the following schedule:
DOF
Classification
of LGUs
Maximum Amount (in Philippine Peso)
Province City Municipality
1
st Class 200,000 200,000 100,000
2
nd Class 200,000 200,000 100,000
3
rd Class 200,000 160,000 100,000
4
th Class 160,000 120,000 100,000
5
th Class 120,000 100,000 100,000
6
th Class 100,000 100,000 100,000
147 Section 52, R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
161
In the case of barangays, Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000).
b) Procurement of ordinary or regular office supplies and equipment not
available in the DBM-PS, in the amount not to exceed the following:
i. For NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional
Government, One Million Pesos (₱1,000,000)
ii. For LGUs, in accordance with the following schedule:
DOF
Classification
of LGUs
Maximum Amount (in Philippine Peso)
Province City Municipality
1
st Class 1,000,000 1,000,000 200,000
2
nd Class 1,000,000 1,000,000 200,000
3
rd Class 1,000,000 800,000 200,000
4
th Class 800,000 600,000 100,000
5
th Class 600,000 400,000 100,000
6
th Class 400,000 200,000 100,000
In the case of barangays, Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000).
The phrase “ordinary or regular office supplies” shall be understood to include
those supplies, commodities, or materials which are necessary in the transaction
of its official businesses, and consumed in the day-to-day office operations.
However, office supplies shall not include services such as repair and
maintenance of equipment and furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial,
security, and related or analogous services.
2. Procedure
a) Shopping under Section 52.1(a)
i. The End-User unit or the duly authorized official or personnel shall
submit a purchase request to the BAC indicating the urgency to
address an identified need of the Procuring Entity and the
unforeseen contingency that caused its necessity.
ii. The BAC shall immediately prepare the RFQ, indicating the
specifications, quantity, ABC, and other terms and conditions of the
contract.
iii. The RFQ may be sent directly to the supplier of known technical,
legal and financial qualifications. Due to the attendant circumstances
and the urgency of the procurement, the supplier shall immediately
respond to the RFQ and signify its technical, legal and financial
capability to supply and deliver the goods to be procured. Posting of
the RFQ may be dispensed with.
iv. The BAC shall immediately validate the technical, legal and financial
capability of the supplier to supply and deliver the goods by
requiring the submission of relevant documents or through other
verifiable means to prove the capability of the Supplier.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
162
v. Upon confirmation and ascertainment of such capability, the BAC
shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of the
supplier with the Single or Lowest Calculated and Responsive
Quotation. In case of approval, the HOPE shall immediately enter
into a contract with the said supplier.
b) Shopping under Section 52.1(b)
i. The End-User unit or the duly authorized official or personnel shall
submit a purchase request to the BAC relative to the goods to be
procured through Shopping.
ii. The BAC shall prepare the RFQ, indicating the specifications,
quantity, ABC, and other terms and conditions of the contract.
iii. Except for those with ABCs equal to Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱
50,000.00) and below, RFQs shall be posted for a period of at least
three (3) calendar days in the PhilGEPS website, website of the
Procuring Entity, if available, and at any conspicuous place reserved
for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity.
iv. The BAC shall send the RFQs to at least three (3) suppliers of known
qualifications, and at least three (3) price quotations must be
obtained. This, notwithstanding, those who responded through any
of the required postings shall be allowed to participate.
v. The deadline for submission may be extended thrice, if none or less
than the required number of quotations are received. For ABCs
more than Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱50,000.00), extensions of
deadline shall likewise be posted for a period of three (3) calendar
days in the PhilGEPS, the website of the Procuring Entity, if any, and
at any conspicuous place in the Procuring Entity’s premises. In case
no supplier responded after the third extension, the BAC shall
conduct a mandatory review in accordance with Section IV(K) of this
Guidelines.
vi. Upon receipt of at least three (3) quotations within the prescribed
deadline, the BAC shall prepare an Abstract of Quotations setting
forth the names of those who responded to the RFQ, their
corresponding price quotations, and the lowest calculated quotation
submitted.
vii. The BAC shall validate the technical, legal and financial capability of
the supplier to supply and deliver the goods.
viii. Upon confirmation and ascertainment of such capability, the BAC
shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of the
supplier with the Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation. In
case of approval, the HOPE shall immediately enter into a contract
with the said supplier.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
163
D. NEGOTIATED PROCUREMENT.148 Negotiated Procurement is a method of
procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services, whereby the
Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract with a technically, legally and
financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant in any of the following cases:
1. TWO FAILED BIDDINGS149
a) Definition. Where there has been failure of competitive bidding or Limited
Source Bidding for the second time as provided for in Section 35 of RA 9184
and its IRR, when:
i. No bids are received;
ii. All prospective bidders are declared ineligible;
iii. All bids fail to comply with all the bid requirements or fail postqualification, or, in the case of consulting services, there is no
successful negotiation; or
iv. The bidder with the Lowest/Single Calculated Responsive Bid or
Highest/Single Rated Responsive Bid refuses, without justifiable
cause, to accept the award of contract, and no award is made in
accordance with Section 40 of RA 9184 and its IRR.
b) Procedures
i. After conduct of the mandatory review of the terms, conditions,
specifications, and cost estimates, as prescribed in Section 35 of the
IRR, the BAC, based on its findings, as assisted by its Secretariat,
TWG and End-User unit may revise and agree on the technical, legal
and financial eligibility requirements and technical specifications or
terms of reference, and if necessary, adjust the ABC, subject to the
required approvals. However, the ABC cannot be increased by more
than twenty percent (20%) of the ABC for the last failed bidding. In
case no revision of the Class “A” Eligibility Document covered by Section
8.5.2 of this IRR is found necessary by the BAC after the conduct of the
mandatory review, the submission of the PhilGEPS Certificate of
Registration and Membership in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR
shall likewise be mandatory.150
ii. The BAC shall invite at least three (3) suppliers, contractors or
consultants, including those disqualified in previous biddings for the
project, for negotiations to ensure effective competition. This,
notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required
postings shall be allowed to participate. Even if only one (1) bidder
should respond to such invitation or posting, the BAC shall proceed
with the negotiation subject to the rules prescribed hereunder.
148 Section 53, R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.
149 Section 53.1, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
150 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
164
iii. Any requirements, guidelines, documents, clarifications, or other
information relative to the negotiations that are communicated by
the BAC to a supplier, contractor, or consultant shall be
communicated on an equal basis to all other suppliers, contractors,
or consultants engaging in negotiations with the BAC relative to the
procurement. The prospective bidders shall be given equal time and
opportunity to negotiate and discuss the technical and financial
requirements of the project to be able to submit a responsive
quotation or proposal.
iv. Following completion of the negotiations, the BAC shall request all
suppliers, contractors, or consultants in the proceedings to submit,
on a specified date, a best offer based on the final technical and
financial requirements.151
v. The BAC shall recommend award of contract to the HOPE in favor of
the supplier, contractor or consultant determined to have the Single
or Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation (for goods and
infrastructure projects) or Single or Highest Rated and Responsive
Proposal (for consulting services). Award of contract shall be made
in accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.
2. EMERGENCY CASES.152
a) Instances when Negotiated Procurement under Emergency Cases
may be resorted to:
i. In case of imminent danger to life or property during a state of
calamity, or
ii. When time is of the essence arising from natural or man-made
calamities or
iii. Other causes where immediate action is necessary:
a) to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or
b) to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other
public utilities.
The instances or situations where the foregoing conditions may be applied
include the provision of immediate response and initial recovery steps to
avoid loss of life, injury, disease and other negative effects on human,
physical, mental and social well-being, together with damage to property,
destruction of assets, loss of services, social and economic disruption and
environmental degradation.153
151 Ibid.
152 Section 53.2, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
153 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2020, dated 9 March 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 13 March
2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
165
The BAC or the End-user unit or any other appropriate bureau, committee,
support or procuring unit shall recommend to the HoPE any revision of the
Annual Procurement Plan (APP) to cover the Procurement Project that will be
resorting to Negotiated Procurement (Emergency Cases) under Section 53.2
of the 2016 revised IRR subject to the validation by the appropriate office in
the Procuring Entity that there are funds in the budget to cover for the
same.154
The proposed APP revision(s) may only be approved by the HoPE upon its
confirmation of the existence and veracity of the ground(s) relied upon in
resorting to Negotiated Procurement (Emergency Cases) under Section 53.2
of the 2016 revised IRR.155
Considering that the underlying reason to support a Negotiated Procurement
through the Emergency modality relates to “time element” as when there is –
a) imminent danger to life or property; or, b) when time is of the essence; or,
c) immediate action is necessary, the Procuring Entity, through the HOPE,
BAC, its Secretariat and End-User unit, should consider appropriate timing or
the proximity of time between the actual procurement activity to be
conducted and the emergency sought to be addressed, such that when the
reason or cause for the emergency has already been abated, adoption of
competitive bidding as the primary mode of procurement shall be considered.
When the ground is based on imminent danger to life during a state of
calamity, there must be a declaration by a competent authority of a state of
calamity pursuant to existing laws, rules and regulations before any
procurement activity may be undertaken.156
The procurement Projects that may be covered by this Section or Negotiated
Procurement (Emergency Cases) under Section 53.2 of the 2016 revised IRR
include the lease of real property or venue for use as quarantine centers,
evacuation sites, medical relief and aid distribution locations, warehousing
facilities, or similar temporary disaster or emergency response facility.157
b) Procedure
i. The End-User unit or the duly authorized official or personnel shall
submit a request to the BAC or the HOPE, as the case may be,
accompanied by appropriate supporting documents identifying the
emergency sought to be addressed, and the necessary goods, civil
works or consulting services (e.g., Technical Specifications, Scope of
Work or Terms of Reference) that have to be procured to address
the emergency.
ii. The BAC or the End-user unit or any other appropriate bureau,
committee, support or procuring unit shall recommend to the HoPE
any revision of the Annual Procurement Plan (APP) to cover the
Procurement Project that will be subject to Negotiated Procurement
154 Ibid.
155 Ibid.
156 Section 16, R.A. No. 10121.
157 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2020, dated 9 March 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 13 March
2020.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
166
(Emergency Cases) under Section 53.2 of the 2016 revised IRR
subject to the validation by the appropriate office in the Procuring
Entity that there are funds in the budget to cover for the same.158
iii. The HoPE may delegate to either the BAC or the End-user unit or
any other appropriate bureau, committee, support or procuring unit
the authority to directly negotiate with a legally, technically, and
financially capable supplier, contractor, or consultant for
procurement undertaken through any of the allowable instances of
Negotiated Procurement (Emergency Cases) under Section 53.2 of
the 2016 revised IRR.159
iv. Upon confirmation and ascertainment of such capability to address
the emergency, the HoPE, upon recommendation of the BAC or the
End-user unit or any other appropriate bureau, committee, support
or procuring unit, authorize for the purpose160 shall immediately
award the contract to the Supplier, Contractor or Consultant.
3. TAKE-OVER OF CONTRACTS161
a) Instances when Take-over of contracts may be resorted to:
i. The contract, previously awarded through Competitive Bidding, has
been rescinded or terminated for causes provided for in the contract
and existing laws; and
ii. Where immediate action is necessary:
a) to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or
b) to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other
public utilities.
b) Procedure
i. The BAC shall post-qualify and negotiate with the second lowest
calculated/highest rated bidder for the project under consideration
at the said bidder’s own original bid price, applicable to the
remaining works to be done. Authority to negotiate contracts for
projects under the foregoing exceptional cases shall be subject to
prior approval by the HOPE concerned, within their respective limits
of approving authority.
ii. If negotiation fails, then the BAC shall post-qualify and negotiate
with the next lowest calculated/highest rated bidder at the said
bidder’s own original bid price.
158 Ibid.
159 Ibid.
160 Ibid.
161 Section 53.3, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
167
iii. If the negotiation fails another time, the process is repeated until all
the bidders from the previous bidding have been considered.
iv. If the negotiation fails and there is no bidder left from the previous
bidding or if the original awardee is a Single Calculated Responsive
Bidder/Single Rated Responsive Bidder, the BAC may either invite at
least three (3) suppliers/contractors/consultants to submit their bids,
or resort to any other appropriate alternative method of
procurement.
v. In case of successful post-qualification and negotiation, the BAC
shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract with the said
supplier, contractor or consultant. Award of contract shall be made
in accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.
4. ADJACENT OR CONTIGUOUS162
a) Definition. Where the subject contract is adjacent or contiguous to an ongoing Infrastructure Project or Consulting Service where the consultants have
unique experience and expertise to deliver the required service, subject to
the following conditions:
i. Original contract is the result of a Competitive Bidding;
ii. Subject contract to be negotiated has similar or related scopes of
work;
iii. It is within the contracting capacity of the contractor/consultant
considering the legal, technical (e.g., PCAB license, SLCC) and
financial (e.g., NFCC for the contiguous project) requirements for
eligibility;
iv. In determining the SLCC, NFCC and PCAB license, the sum of the
value of the remaining works for the existing contract and the ABC
of the contiguous or adjacent work shall be considered;
v. The contractor/consultant uses the same prices or lower unit prices
as in the original contract less mobilization cost;
vi. The ABC of the contiguous or adjacent work involved does not
exceed the contract amount of the ongoing project;
vii. The contractor/consultant has no negative slippage/delay in the
original contract during the time of negotiation; and
viii. Negotiations for the procurement are commenced before the expiry
of the original contract.
In infrastructure projects, the phrase “adjacent or contiguous” refers to
projects that are in actual physical contact with each other or in the
immediate vicinity such that the required equipment and other resources can
162 Section 53.4, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
168
easily be mobilized; while in consulting services, it pertains to the linkage or
relationship of the subject matters, outputs or deliverables required.
If there is a necessity to introduce new items which are related to the scope
of work of the original contract, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the unit
prices of the new items are equal to or lower than the prevailing market
prices.
b) Procedure
i. The BAC shall negotiate with the contractor or consultant for the
ongoing infrastructure project or consulting services (e.g., scope of
work or terms of reference, unit price and other terms and
conditions of the contract).
ii. In case of successful negotiation, the BAC shall recommend to the
HOPE the award of contract in favor of the contractor or consultant.
Award of contract shall be made in accordance with Section IV (L) of
this Guidelines.
5. AGENCY-TO-AGENCY163
a) Definition. Procurement from another agency of the government (i.e.,
Servicing Agency) that has the mandate to deliver goods or services or to
undertake infrastructure projects or consultancy services as required by the
Procuring Entity.
Agency-to-Agency Agreements shall be governed by the Guidelines, unless
otherwise provided by a special law, such as in the case of Procurement of
Printing Services from Recognized Government Printers164 and Procurement of
Common-use Supplies and Equipment from the DBM-PS.
All procurement to be undertaken by the Servicing Agency, including those
required for the project, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of
R.A. 9184.
All projects undertaken through Agency-to-Agency Agreements shall be
subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and
regulations.
b) Conditions. It is the general policy of government to purchase its
requirements from the private sector. However, it acknowledges that, in
some exceptional cases, procurement from another agency of the
government is more efficient and economical for the government, subject to
the following conditions:
i. The Procuring Entity shall justify that entering into an Agency-toAgency Agreement with the Servicing Agency is more efficient and
economical to the government;
163 Section 53.5, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
164 Refer to Appendix 20 for the Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
169
ii. Servicing Agency has the mandate to deliver the goods and services
required to be procured or to undertake the infrastructure project or
consultancy required by the Procuring Agency;
iii. Servicing Agency has the absorptive capacity to undertake the
project;
iv. Servicing Agency owns or has access to the necessary tools and
equipment required for the project;
v. Sub-contracting is not allowed. However, the servicing agency may
implement the infrastructure project in-house, by job-order, or
through the pakyaw contracting system; and
vi. For procurement of infrastructure projects, the Servicing Agency
must have a track record of having completed, or supervised a
project, by administration or by contract, similar to and with a cost
of at least fifty percent (50%) of the project at hand.
c) Procedure
i. The End-User unit shall justify to the BAC that the resort to Agencyto-Agency is more efficient and economical to the government.
ii. It shall likewise secure a certificate from the relevant officer of the
Servicing Agency that the latter complies with all the foregoing
conditions.
iii. Based on the assessment and recommendation of the End-User unit,
the BAC shall issue a Resolution recommending the use of Agencyto-Agency Agreement to the HOPE.
iv. In case of approval, the HOPE shall enter into a Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) with the Servicing Agency.
6. SCIENTIFIC, SCHOLARLY OR ARTISTIC WORK, EXCLUSIVE
TECHNOLOGY AND MEDIA SERVICES165
a) Definition. Where Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services
can be contracted to a particular supplier, contractor, or consultant as
determined by the HOPE, for any of the following reasons:
i. The requirement is for:
a) Work of art; commissioned work or services of an artist for
specific artistic skills (e.g., singer, performer, poet, writer,
painter, sculptor, etc.)
b) Scientific, academic, scholarly work or research, or legal
services;
165 Section 53.6, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
170
c) Highly-specialized life-saving medical equipment, as certified by
the Department of Health;
d) Scientific, technical, economic, business, trade or legal journal,
magazine, paper, subscription, or other exclusive statistical
publications and references; or
e) Media documentation, advertisement, or announcement through
television, radio, newspaper, internet, and other communication
media.
Due to the nature of the information to be disseminated,
alongside principles of transparency, efficiency and economy,
award to more than one (1) supplier may be made by the
Procuring Entity.
ii. The construction or installation of an infrastructure facility where the
material, equipment, or technology under a proprietary right can
only be obtained from the same contractor.
To justify the need to procure through this negotiated modality, the End-User
shall conduct a market study and determine the probable sources. This study
should confirm that the supplier, contractor or consultant could undertake the
project at more advantageous terms. In all cases, the market study must be
conducted prior to the commencement of the procurement process.
b) Procedure
i. The BAC shall undertake the negotiation with a technically, legally
and financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant based on
the Technical Specifications, Scope of Work or Terms of Reference
prepared by the End-User.
ii. Upon successful negotiation, the BAC shall recommend the award of
contract to the HOPE in accordance with Section (IV)(L) of this
Guidelines.
7. HIGHLY TECHNICAL CONSULTANTS166
a) Definition. Procurement of consultancy contract involving an individual
consultant, subject to the following conditions:
i. The individual consultant will be hired to do work that is either:
a) Highly technical or proprietary; or
b) Primarily confidential or policy determining, where trust and
confidence are the primary consideration.
166 Section 53.7, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
171
ii. The term of the individual consultant shall, at the most, be on a six
(6) month basis, renewable at the option of the appointing HOPE,
but in no case shall exceed the term of the latter.
b) Procedure
i. The End-User Unit shall justify to the BAC the engagement of the
individual in accordance with the conditions set forth in this Section.
ii. The BAC shall undertake the negotiation with the individual
consultant based on the Terms of Reference prepared by the EndUser. Considering the nature of the consultancy work, the
negotiations need not be elaborate, it is enough that the BAC has
validated that the individual is legally, technically and financially
capable to undertake and fulfill the consultancy work based on the
Terms of Reference.
iii. The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract to the
individual consultant. Award of contract shall be made in accordance
with Section (IV)(L) of this Guidelines.
8. SMALL VALUE PROCUREMENT (SVP)167
a) Definition. Procurement of (a) goods not covered by Shopping under
Section 52 of the IRR of RA 9184, (b) infrastructure projects, and (c)
consulting services, where the amount involved does not exceed the following
threshold:
i. For NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional
Government, One Million Pesos (₱ 1,000,000)
ii. For LGUs, in accordance with the following schedule:
DOF
Classification
of LGUs
Maximum Amount (in Philippine Peso)
Province City Municipality
1
st Class 1,000,000 1,000,000 200,000
2
nd Class 1,000,000 1,000,000 200,000
3
rd Class 1,000,000 800,000 200,000
4
th Class 800,000 600,000 100,000
5
th Class 600,000 400,000 100,000
6
th Class 400,000 200,000 100,000
In the case of barangays, Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱ 50,000).
b) Procedure
i. The End-User shall submit a request for SVP to the BAC, which
indicates the technical specifications, scope of work, terms of
reference, ABC and other terms and conditions.
167 Section 53.9, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
172
ii. The BAC shall prepare and send the RFQs/RFPs to at least three (3)
suppliers, contractors or consultants of known qualifications. This,
notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required
postings shall be allowed to participate. Receipt of at least one (1)
quotation is sufficient to proceed with the evaluation thereof.
iii. Except for those with ABCs equal to Fifty Thousand Pesos (₱
50,000.00) and below, RFQs shall be posted for a period of three (3)
calendar days in the PhilGEPS website, website of the Procuring
Entity, if available, and at any conspicuous place reserved for this
purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity.
iv. Pre-bid conference may be conducted at the discretion of the BAC,
in order to clarify and/or explain any of the requirements, terms,
conditions, and specifications stipulated in the RFQ/RFP.
v. After the deadline for submission of quotations/proposals, an
Abstract of Quotations/Ratings shall be prepared setting forth the
names of those who responded to the RFQ/RFP, their corresponding
price quotations/ratings.
vi. The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in
favor of the supplier or contractor with the Single or Lowest
Calculated and Responsive Quotation (for goods or infrastructure
projects), or consultant with the Single or Highest Rated and
Responsive Proposal (for consulting services). In case of approval,
the HOPE shall immediately enter into contract with the said
supplier, contractor or consultant.
9. LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY AND VENUE168
a) Definition. Procurement covering lease of real property and venue for
official use, where:
i. Real Property refers to land and buildings (office spaces or units)
and constructions of all kinds adhered to the soil.
ii. Venue refers to training centers, convention halls, hotels, and
similar establishments catering to trainings, seminars, conferences,
conventions, symposia and similar gatherings requiring the official
participation of government officials and employees. This may
include meals and accommodation depending on the requirements
of the Procuring Entity.
iii. Lessee refers to any government agency temporarily occupying a
real property on the basis of a contract executed with the private
individual, partnership, cooperative, association, or corporation
having absolute ownership over such real property.
168 Section 53.10, IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
173
iv. Lessor refers to any government agency or private individual,
partnership, cooperative, association, or corporation having absolute
ownership over the real property or venue to be leased.
b) Policy Considerations
i. Publicly-owned vis-a-vis privately-owned real property and venue
It is preferred that government agencies lease publicly-owned real
property or venue from other government agencies.
If there is an available publicly-owned real property or venue that
complies with the requirements of the Procuring Entity, it may enter
into a contract of lease with the government-agency owner.
In the event that the Procuring Entity would resort to privatelyowned real property or venue, the End-User unit shall justify that
the same is more efficient and economical to the government.
ii. Location
The location of the real property or venue to be leased should have
been meticulously selected by the Procuring Entity after taking into
consideration, among others, the need for prudence and economy in
government service and the suitability of the area in relation to the
mandate of the office, and its accessibility to its clients. In the lease
of venue, other factors such as the nature of the event or the level
of security in the proposed location may also be taken into account.
iii. ABC and rental rates
The ABC shall be set using the midpoint of the range obtained from
the results of the market analysis on the prevailing lease rates for
real property or venue within the vicinity of the selected location
complying with the criteria and technical specifications of the EndUser Unit. In no case shall the rental rates, including additional
expenses, such as association dues in the case of lease of real
property, exceed the ABC.
As a general rule, rental rates are considered reasonable when they
represent or approximate the value of what the Lessee gets in terms
of accommodation, facility, amenities, and convenience from the
leased real property or venue, and the Lessor gets an equitable
return of capital or investment.
Rental rates should also be within the prevailing market rates for
lease of real property or venue with the same or similar condition or
classification and located within the vicinity. Rental rate refers to
the amount paid by the Lessee for the use and/or occupancy of the
privately-owned real property to the Lessor, where payment is
usually made on a monthly basis.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
174
iv. Technical Specifications
Technical Specification shall be prepared taking into consideration
the rating factors under Appendix B of this Guidelines.
c) Procedures for Lease of Privately-Owned Real Property and Venue
i. Real Property
a) The BAC shall invite at least three (3) prospective Lessors to
submit sealed price quotations or password-protected price
quotations in compressed archive folders, in case of electronic
submission of price quotations.169
On a specified date, submitted price quotations shall be opened
to determine the Lowest Calculated Quotation. Receipt of at
least one (1) quotation is sufficient to proceed with the
evaluation thereof.
For electronic submission of price quotations, the passwords for
accessing the same will be disclosed by the prospective Lessors
on a specified date which may be done in person or face-to-face
through videoconferencing, webcasting or similar technology.170
b) The real property being offered by the Lessor with the Single or
Lowest Calculated Quotation shall be rated in accordance with
the technical specifications and the reasonableness of its price
quotation shall be determined in accordance with the
methodology prescribed in Appendix B.
c) Upon determination of the responsiveness and reasonableness
of the quotation, the BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the
award of contract in favor of the Lessor with the Single or
Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation. Award of contract
shall be made in accordance with Section IV(L) of this
Guidelines.
ii. Venue
a) The BAC shall send the RFQ to at least three (3) venues within
the vicinity of the selected location. Receipt of at least one (1)
quotation is sufficient to proceed with the evaluation thereof.
b) The venue being offered by the Lessor with the Lowest
Calculated Quotation shall then be rated in accordance with the
technical specifications prepared pursuant to Appendix B of this
Guidelines. Compliance rating with technical specifications may
be conducted through ocular inspection, interviews, or other
forms of due diligence.
169 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
170 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
175
c) Upon determination of the responsiveness of the quotation, the
BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in
favor of the Lessor with the Single or Lowest Calculated and
Responsive Quotation. Award of contract shall be made in
accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines
d) Renewal of Contract of Lease of Real Property
i. Prior to the expiration of the lease contract, the end-user of the
procuring entity must conduct a cost-benefit analysis to assess the
quality of service under the lease contract. For instance, it must
compare the rental rates charged by its lessor against other lessors
in the area. It must also analyze whether entering into a new
contract will be more expensive taking into consideration the cost
of transfer and accessibility to the public. In assessing the existing
lease, PEs are encouraged to consult relevant government agencies
regarding any new policy or directive in the lease of real property.
(n)
ii. If the results of the CBA, conducted by the end-user, continue to
favor the existing lessor, then the Head of the Procuring Entity
(HoPE) may simply renew its lease contract. If it does not, then the
PE should procure a new lease contract in accordance with Section
53.10 of the IRR of RA 9184 and these guidelines. For efficiency
and economy, during the effectivity of the contract, or upon its
renewal, the PE may consider the expansion or reduction of the
space provided by the existing lessor, provided that the leased
premises can accommodate the space requirements of the PE in
case of expansion, based on the need of the PE and the best way
by which such need may be addressed and satisfied, subject to
existing budgeting, accounting and auditing rules.171
(n)
10.DIRECT RETAIL PURCHASE OF PETROLEUM FUEL, OIL AND LUBRICANT
(POL) PRODUCTS AND AIRLINE TICKETS172
a. Policy Considerations. All procurement of POL products and airline tickets
shall be done through competitive bidding, except when the Procuring Entity
has determined that Direct Retail Purchase is the best modality for the
procurement of non-bulk POL products or where fees for additional services
or functionalities are charged on top of the payment for the required POL
products or airline tickets.(n)173
In case of competitive bidding, other factors such as value-added or related
services may also be taken into account in determining the procurement
project’s ABC. (n)174
b. Definition. Where Goods and Services are required by a Procuring Entity for
the efficient discharge of its principal mandate, governmental functions, or
171 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2018, dated 18 May 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August 2019.
172 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 24-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
173 Ibid.
174 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
176
(n)
(n)
(n)
day-to-day operations, direct retail purchase of POL products and airline
tickets may be made by end-users delegated to procure the same from
identified direct suppliers or service providers. (n)175
c. Conditions. The procurement of POL products and airline tickets can be
contracted by the end-user to identified direct suppliers or service providers
under the following conditions: 176
i. For petroleum fuel (gasoline, diesel, and kerosene), oil and
lubricants: (n)177
a.) Direct retail purchase of POL products estimated to be
necessary for the operations of the Procuring Entity within the
fiscal year, including provisions for foreseeable emergencies
based on historical records, shall be reflected in the annual
procurement plan (APP) in its entirety including any
amendment thereto which shall be reflected in the
supplemental APP; 178
b.) Direct purchase must be made from any available retailers,
dealers or gas stations at retail pump price; 179
c.) The requirement must be intended to be used for any official
government vehicles and equipment for immediate
consumption; and d) Payment may be made through cash
advance, reimbursement or other allowable payment modalities
subject to pertinent auditing and accounting rules. (n)180
ii. For airline tickets:
a.) Direct purchase of airline tickets required for official travels
within the fiscal year, including provisions for foreseeable
emergencies based on historical records, shall be reflected in
the APP in its entirety including any amendment thereto which
shall be reflected in the supplemental APP;
b.) Direct purchase must be made from any commercial airline at
fairly reasonable rates, subject to flight availability at the time
of booking, travel days, stopovers, routes, additional visa
requirements and other reasonable considerations as
determined by the end-user;
c.) Payment may be made through cash advance, reimbursement
or other allowable payment modalities subject to pertinent
auditing and accounting rules; and
175 Ibid.
176 Ibid.
177 Ibid.
178 Ibid.
179 Ibid.
180 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 24-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
177
d.) Procurement of airline tickets must be in accordance with
existing rules and regulations governing official local and
foreign travels of government personnel and Executive Order
No. 77, s. 2019.
d. Procedure.
i. The end-user delegated to directly purchase POL products and
airline tickets in accordance with Part IV (J) of this Guidelines shall
determine the supplier or service provider capable of delivering the
required POL products and airline tickets at retail pump price or at
the most reasonable retail price, as the case may be.
ii. Taking into account the usual trade and business practices being
observed in the industry and the requirements and other reasonable
considerations identified by the end-user, direct retail purchase of
the required POL products or airline tickets shall be carried out in
accordance with pertinent accounting principles and practices as
well as of sound management and fiscal administration provided
that they do not contravene existing laws and regulations applicable
to financial transactions.(n) 181
VI. REPEALING CLAUSE
This Consolidated Guidelines for Alternative Methods of Procurement (Consolidated
Guidelines) repeals the following Guidelines: Guidelines for Shopping and Small Value
Procurement182, Guidelines for Agency-to-Agency Agreements183, and Guidelines for Lease of
Privately-Owned Real Estate and Venue.184
Any other guidelines, administrative order, office order, rule or regulation and/or parts
thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Consolidated Guidelines are
hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.
VII. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE
This Consolidated Guidelines for Alternative Methods of Procurement shall take effect sixty
(60) calendar days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
nationwide circulation and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of
three (3) copies of this Annex “H”.
181 Ibid.
182 GPPB Resolution 09-2009, dated 23 November 2009.
183 GPPB Resolution 18-2007, dated 31 May 2007.
184 GPPB Resolution 08-2009, dated 3 November 2009.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
178
ANNEX “H”
APPENDIX A
DOCUMENTARY REQUIREMENT
ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT
I. This Appendix prescribes for the documents that the BAC shall require from suppliers,
contractors and consultants for Alternative Methods of Procurement, except for Repeat
Order, Shopping under Section 52.1(a), and Negotiated Procurement under Section
53.5 (Agency-to-Agency) of the IRR of RA 9184.185
II. The BAC shall indicate in the RFQ or RFP at what stage of the procurement process
these requirements must be submitted, i.e., submission of offer/s, evaluation of
offer/s, or186 before issuance of Notice of Award. (a)
Alternative
Modality
Mayor’s/
Business
Permit
Professional
License
/Curriculum
Vitae
(Consulting
Services)
PhilGEP
S Reg.
Number
PCAB
Licens
e
(Infra
.)
NFCC
(Infra.)
Income/
Business
Tax
Return
Omnibus
Sworn
Statement
I. Direct
Contracting
[Section 50]
 

For ABCs
above
P500K
II. Shopping
[Sec 52.1(b)]
 
III.
Negotiated
Procurement

****
PhilGEPS
Platinum if
legal
eligibility
requirements
are not
subject to
revision after
the conduct
of the
mandatory
review187
A. Two Failed
Biddings
[(Section
53.1])
B. 

For ABCs
above
P500K
 Emergency For
Cases   ABCs
[(Section above
53.2)] P500K
185 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
186 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 36-2017, dated 7 November 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 24 April
2018.
187 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
188 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 21-2017, dated 30 May 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20
November 2017.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
179
Alternative
Modality
Mayor’s/
Business
Permit
Professional
License
/Curriculum
Vitae
(Consulting
Services)
PhilGEP
S Reg.
Number
PCAB
Licens
e
(Infra
.)
NFCC
(Infra.)
Income/
Business
Tax
Return
Omnibus
Sworn
Statement
C. Take-Over
of Contracts
(Section
53.3.2; for
new bidders)
    
D. Adjacent/
Contiguous
(Section
53.4)
 
E. Scientific,
Scholarly or
Artistic
Work,
Exclusive
Technology
and Media
Services
(Section
53.6)
  

For ABCs
above
P500K
F. Highly
Technical
Consultant
(Section
53.7)
  
G. Small
Value
Procurement
(Section
53.9)
   

For ABCs
above
P500K

For ABCs
above
P50K
H. Lease of
Real
Property or
Venue
(Section
53.10)

Except
for gov’t
agencies
as lessors

Except
for gov’t
agencies
as
lessors

Except
for gov’t
agencies
as lessors
*For individuals engaged under Sec. 53.6, 53.7 and 53.9 of the IRR of RA No. 9184, only the BIR
Certificate of Registration shall be submitted in lieu of DTI Registration and Mayor’s Permit.
** Requirements under Section 53.6 of the IRR of RA No. 9184 will not apply to artists such as singer,
performer, poet, writer, painter and sculptor who are not engaged in business. (n)
*** For methods of procurement requiring Mayor’s Permit and PhilGEPS Registration Number,
Certificate of Platinum Membership may be submitted in lieu of the said documents. (n)
**** For purposes of Two-Failed Biddings under Section 53.1 of the IRR of RA No. 9184, the PhilGEPS
Certificate of Registration and Membership in accordance with Section 8.5.2 shall be submitted
pursuant to Item V(D)(1)(b) of this Guidelines, subject to the qualification stated in Item
V(D)(1)(b)(i).189
III. Procuring Entities already maintaining an updated file of any of the bidder’s abovementioned requirements, whether through the PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration
and Membership or its own records, may no longer require its re-submission.
189 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
180
ANNEX “H”
APPENDIX B
DOCUMENTARY REQUIREMENT
ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT
LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY AND VENUE:
RATING FACTORS AND DETERMINATION OF REASONABLENESS OF RENTAL
RATES
A. TABLE OF RATING FACTORS FOR LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
RATING FACTORS WEIGHT
(%) RATING
I. Location and Site Condition
1. Accessibility (25)
2. Topography and Drainage (20)
3. Sidewalk and waiting shed (15)
4. Parking space (15)
5. Economic potential (10)
6. Land classification, utilization, and
assessment
(10)
7. Other added amenities (5)
100
II. Neighborhood Data
1. Prevailing rental rate (20)
2. Sanitation and health condition (20)
3. Adverse influence (15)
4. Property utilization (15)
5. Police and fire station (15)
6. Cafeterias (10)
7. Banking/postal/telecom (5)
100
III. Real Property
1. Structural condition (30)
2. Functionality
a. Module (6)
b. Room arrangement (6)
c. Circulation (6)
d. Light and ventilation (6)
e. Space requirements (6)
3. Facilities
a. Water supply and toilet (6)
b. Lighting system (6)
c. Elevators (6)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
181
RATING FACTORS WEIGHT
(%) RATING
d. Fire escapes (6)
e. Firefighting equipment (6)
4. Other requirements
a. Maintenance (5)
b. Attractiveness (5)
100
IV. Free Services and Facilities
1. Janitorial and security (20)
2. Air conditioning (20)
3. Repair and maintenance (20)
4. Water and light consumption (20)
5. Secured parking space (20)
100
I. Location and Site Condition × (.20) =
II. Neighborhood Data × (.20) =
III. Real property × (.50) =
IV. Free Services and Facilities × (.10) =
FACTOR VALUE
Note: Weight of each rating factor may be changed as long as total weight per classification is
equivalent to 100. Figures in parenthesis are samples. Procuring Entity must determine
passing rate before inviting bids from Lessors. A bid is determined to be responsive if it is
equal to or higher than the passing rate.
B. DETERMINATION OF REASONABLENESS OF RENTAL RATES
1. The reasonableness of rental rates may be determined using any of the following
methods.
1.1. Computation based on Observed Depreciation
This method uses the following formula and a depreciation rate determined
after meticulous ocular inspection of the actual condition of the real property:
Reproduction
Cost
= Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 –
Depreciation Rate)
Formula Rate = Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate
Rental Rate = Formula Rate × Factor Value
Monthly Rental = Rentable Area × Rental Rate
1.1.1. The following weights may be used in arriving at the observed
depreciation rate:
Status Depreciation (%)
Good 20
Fair 40
Poor 60
Very poor 80
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
182
1.1.2. Reproduction Cost refers to the estimated total cost of replacing the
real property with the same utility.
1.1.3. Capitalization Rate refers to the interest rate on the cost or value of
the property.
1.1.4. Rentable Area refers to the total area of the real property in square
meters being occupied or to be occupied by the Lessee less the
common area like lobby, stairway, elevator hall, common comfort
room, machine room for air conditioner, and other areas of common
use by the public or upper floor occupants.
1.1.5. Factor Value refers to the rating factor where locations and site
conditions, neighborhood data and real property structural condition,
functionality, facilities and other requirements, including free services
and facilities offered by the Lessor are considered. The rating factors
and its corresponding weights are provided in Table A of this
Appendix.
1.2. Computation based on Straight Line Depreciation
This method uses the following formula:
Age of Real
Property
= Current Year – Year of Construction
Depreciation Rate = Please See Table of Structural Depreciation
Reproduction
Cost
= Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 –
Depreciation Rate)
Formula Rate = Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate
Rental Rate = Formula Rate × Factor Value
Monthly Rental = Rentable Area × Rental Rate
1.2.1. Depreciation rate shall be determined using the following Table of
Structural Depreciation provided by the DPWH:
ESTIMATED LIFE OF REAL PROPERTY
AGE WOODEN
FRAME
(40 years)
SEMICONCRETE
(60 years)
REINFORCED
CONCRETE
(75 years)
STRUCTURAL
REINFORCED
(100 years)
Percentage (%) of estimated life
1 3 2.5 2 1.5
2 6 4.5 3.8 2.8
3 8.9 6.9 5.6 4.2
4 11.7 9 7.4 5.5
5 14.5 11.1 9.1 6.7
6 17.2 13.1 10.7 8.1
7 19.8 15.1 12.3 9.3
8 22.4 17 13.9 10.5
9 25 18 15.5 11.8
10 27.5 20.7 17.9 13
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
183
ESTIMATED LIFE OF REAL PROPERTY
AGE WOODEN
FRAME
(40 years)
SEMICONCRETE
(60 years)
REINFORCED
CONCRETE
(75 years)
STRUCTURAL
REINFORCED
(100 years)
Percentage (%) of estimated life
11 29.9 22.5 18.5 14.2
12 32.2 24.5 20 15.3
13 34.5 26.6 21.4 16.4
14 36.8 27.7 22.8 17.5
15 39 29.3 24.3 18.6
20 49.1 37 30.8 24.8
25 57.7 43.8 36.8 29
30 65 50 42.4 33.6
35 70 55.6 47.5 38
40 75 60.6 52.2 42.1
45 65 56.5 46
50 68.9 60.5 49.6
55 72.3 64.1 53.1
60 75 67.3 56.3
65 70.3 59.3
70 73 62
75 75 64.5
80 67
85 69.3
90 71.4
95 73.3
100 75
1.2.2. Estimated Unit Construction Cost refers to the estimated prevailing
cost of construction per square meter of the real property being
appraised. The respective Estimated Unit Construction Cost of types
of real property for each region may be obtained from the Bureau of
Maintenance of the DPWH.
1.2.3. Reproduction Cost, Capitalization Rate, Rentable Area and Factor
Value shall have the same meaning as those referred Items 1.1.2 to
1.1.5.
1.3. Comparative Market Price Analysis
This method is based on the conduct of comparative market analysis on the
prevailing lease rates for real properties within the vicinity of the selected
location complying with the criteria and technical specifications of the
Procuring Entity. In the lease of vacant lot or other land spaces, the Procuring
Entity shall likewise consider the zonal valuation issued by the city or
municipality having jurisdiction over the property.
2. If the price quotation of the prospective Lessor does not exceed the computed
monthly rental or is within the prevailing market rates, the rental rate offered may be
regarded as reasonable, and its quotation may then be considered for award.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
184
3. Sample Computations for Observed Depreciation and Straight-Line Depreciation:
A 5-storey office building made of reinforced concrete structure with mechanical
equipment, i.e., elevator, air conditioning system, etc.
Date of Construction 1987
Estimated Unit Construction Cost P25,000/sq.m.
Depreciation 20% (Good condition)
Capitalization Rate 20% (Variable based on bank rate)
Factor Value 90% (Based on rating)
COMPUTATION BASED ON OBSERVED DEPRECIATION
Reproduction Cost = Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 – Depreciation Rate)
= P25,000/sq.m. (1 – 0.20)
= P20,000/sq.m.
Formula Rate = Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate
= 20,000 (0.20/12) = 20,000 (0.0167)
= P334/sq.m./mo.
Rental Rate = Formula Rate × Factor Value
P334 (0.90)
300.60/sq.m./mo. say 300/sq.m.
Rentable Area = 200.00 sq.m.
Monthly Rental = Rentable Area × Rental Rate
= 200/sq.m. × P300/sq.m./mo.
= P60,000.00/mo.
COMPUTATION BASED ON STRAIGHT LINE DEPRECIATION
Age of Real
Property
= Current Year – Year of Construction
= 2007 – 1987
= 20 years
Depreciation Rate = See Appendix B for the Table of Structural Depreciation
Reproduction Cost = Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 – Depreciation
Rate)
= P25,000/sq.m. (1 – 0.248)
= P18,800/sq.m.
Formula Rate = Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate
= P18,800 (0.20/12) = 18,800 (0.0167)
= P313.96/sq.m./mo.
Rental Rate = Formula Rate × Factor Value
= P313.96 (0.90)
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
185
= P282.56/sq.m./mo. say P285.00/sq.m.
Rentable Area = 200.00 sq.m.
Monthly Rental = Rentable Area × Rental Rate
= 200 sq.m. × P285.00/sq.m.
= P57,000.00/mo.
D. TABLE OF RATING FACTORS FOR LEASE OF VENUE
RATING FACTORS WEIGHT (%) RATING
I. Availability 100
II Location and Site Condition
1. Accessibility (50)
2. Parking space (50)
100
III. Neighborhood Data
1. Sanitation and health condition (25)
2. Police and fire station (25)
3. Restaurant (25)
4. Banking and Postal (25)
100
IV. Venue
a. Structural condition (20)
b. Functionality
a. Conference Rooms (10)
b. Room arrangement (e.g., single,
double, etc.)
(5)
c. Light, ventilation, and air
conditioning
(5)
d. Space requirements (5)
c. Facilities
a. Water supply and toilet (4)
b. Lighting system (5)
c. Elevators (4)
d. Fire escapes (4)
e. Firefighting equipment (4)
f. Internet and Telecommunications (4)
g. Audio visual equipment (5)
d. Other requirements
a. Maintenance (5)
b. Attractiveness (5)
c. Security (5)
e. Catering Services (5)
f. Client’s satisfactory rating (5)
100
I. Availability X (.5) =
II. Location and Site Condition X (.1) =
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “H”
186
III. Neighborhood Data X (.05) =
IV. Venue X (.35) =
FACTOR VALUE
Note: Weight of each rating factor may be changed as long as total weight per classification is
equivalent to 100. Figures in parenthesis are samples. Procuring Entity must determine
passing rate before inviting bids from Lessors. A bid is determined to be responsive if it is
equal to or higher than the passing rate.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “I”
187
ANNEX “I”
GUIDELINES ON TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS
I. PURPOSE, SCOPE, AND APPLICATION
These guidelines aim to promote fairness in the termination of procurement contracts
and to prescribe contract conditions and measures to enable government to protect its
interests. For this purpose, policies and procedures relating to the whole or partial
termination of government procurement contracts of goods, infrastructure projects,
and consulting services are herein established.
II. DEFINITION OF TERMS
1. Coercive Practice means harming or threatening to harm, directly or indirectly,
persons or their property to influence their participation in a procurement
process, or affect the execution of a contract.
2. Collusive Practice means a scheme or arrangement including practice among
bidders (prior to or after bid submission) designed to establish bid prices at
artificial non-competitive levels to prevent free and open competition.
3. Corrupt Practice means the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting of anything
of value to influence the action of a public official in the selection process or in
contract execution. It also means entering, on behalf of the Government, into
any contract or transaction manifestly and grossly disadvantageous to the same,
whether or not the public officer profits or will profit thereby; and similar acts as
provided in Republic Act 3019.
4. Fraudulent Practice means a misrepresentation of facts in order to influence a
selection process or the execution of a contract to the detriment of the Procuring
Entity.
5. Head of the Procuring Entity refers to: (i) the head of the agency or his duly
authorized official, for national government agencies; (ii) the governing board or
its duly authorized official, for government-owned and/or controlled corporations;
or (iii) the local chief executive, for local government units. Provided, that in a
department, office or agency where the procurement is decentralized, the Head
of each decentralized unit shall be considered as the Head of the Procuring Entity
subject to the limitations and authority delegated by the head of the department,
office or agency.
6. Implementing Unit refers to the unit or office having direct supervision or
administration over the implementation of the contract such as the Project
Management Office or the End-User Unit.
7. Termination in Part means the termination of a part but not all, of the work
that has not been completed and accepted under a contract.
8. Termination in Whole means the termination of all of the work that has not
been completed and accepted under a contract.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “I”
188
9. Show Cause refers to a notice which the Procuring Entity is required to issue
prior to terminating a contract. The purpose of a show cause notice is to enable
the contractor to present its position why the contract should not be terminated.
10. Verified Report refers to the report submitted by the Implementing Unit to the
Head of the Procuring Entity setting forth its findings as to the existence of
grounds or causes for termination and explicitly stating its recommendation for
the issuance of a Notice to Terminate.
III. GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS
A. Termination for Default
1. In contracts for Goods:
The following are ground for termination of contract for default:(a) 190
a) Pursuant to Sec. 68 of the 2016 revised IRR, the Procuring Entity may
terminate the contract when outside of force majeure, the Supplier fails
to deliver or perform any or all of the Goods within the period(s)
specified in the contract, or within any extension thereof granted by the
Procuring Entity pursuant to a request made by the Supplier prior to the
delay, and such failure amounts to at least ten percent (10%) of the
contract price;(a)191
b) Pursuant to Sec. 68 of the 2016 revised IRR, the Procuring Entity may
terminate the contract when, as a result of force majeure, the Supplier
is unable to deliver or perform any or all of the Goods, amounting to at
least ten percent (10%) of the contract price, for a period of not less
than sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of the notice from the
Procuring Entity stating that the circumstance of force majeure is
deemed to have ceased; or(a)192
c) The Procuring Entity shall terminate the contract when the Supplier fails
to perform any other obligation under the Contract.193
(a)
2. In contracts for Infrastructure Projects:
The Procuring Entity shall terminate a contract for default when any of the
following conditions attend its implementation:
a) Due to the Contractor’s fault and while the project is on-going, it has
incurred negative slippage of fifteen percent (15%) or more in
accordance with Presidential Decree 1870;
190 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 07-2019, dated 8 March 2019, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 4 May
2019.
191 Ibid.
192 Ibid.
193 Ibid.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “I”
189
b) Due to the Contractor’s fault and after the contract time has expired, it
has incurred a negative slippage of ten percent (10%) or more in the
completion of the work; or
c) The Contractor:
i. abandons the contract works, refuses or fails to comply with a
valid instruction of the Procuring Entity or fails to proceed
expeditiously and without delay despite a written notice by the
Procuring Entity;
ii. does not actually have on the project site the minimum essential
equipment listed on the Bid necessary to prosecute the Works in
accordance with the approved work plan and equipment
deployment schedule as required for the project;
iii. does not execute the Works in accordance with the contract or
persistently or flagrantly neglects to carry out its obligations under
the contract;
iv. neglects or refuses to remove materials or to perform a new work
that has been rejected as defective or unsuitable; or
v. sub-lets any part of the contract works without approval by the
Procuring Entity.
3. In contracts for Consulting Services:
The Procuring Entity shall terminate a contract for default when any of the
following conditions attend its implementation:
a) Outside of force majeure, the Consultant fails to deliver or perform the
Outputs and Deliverables within the period(s) specified in the contract,
or within any extension thereof granted by the Procuring Entity
pursuant to a request made by the Consultant prior to the delay;
b) As a result of force majeure, the Consultant is unable to deliver or
perform a material portion of the Outputs and Deliverables for a period
of not less than sixty (60) calendar days after the Consultant’s receipt of
the notice from the Procuring Entity stating that the circumstance of
force majeure is deemed to have ceased; or
c) The Consultant fails to perform any other obligation under the contract.
B. Termination for Convenience
The Procuring Entity may terminate the Contract, in whole or in part, at any time
for its convenience. The Head of the Procuring Entity may terminate a contract
for the convenience of the Government if he has determined the existence of
conditions that make Project Implementation economically, financially or
technically impractical and/or unnecessary, such as, but not limited to, fortuitous
event(s) or changes in law and national government policies.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “I”
190
C. Termination for Insolvency
The Procuring Entity shall terminate the contract if the
Supplier/Contractor/Consultant is declared bankrupt or insolvent as determined
with finality by a court of competent jurisdiction. In this event, termination will
be without compensation to the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant, provided that
such termination will not prejudice or affect any right of action or remedy which
has accrued or will accrue thereafter to the Procuring Entity and/or the
Supplier/Contractor/Consultant.
D. Termination for Unlawful Acts
The Procuring Entity may terminate the contract in case it is determined prima
facie that the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant has engaged, before or during the
implementation of the contract, in unlawful deeds and behaviors relative to
contract acquisition and implementation. Unlawful acts include, but are not
limited to, the following:
a) Corrupt, fraudulent, collusive and coercive practices;
b) Drawing up or using forged documents;
c) Using adulterated materials, means or methods, or engaging in
production contrary to rules of science or the trade; and
d) Any other act analogous to the foregoing.
E. Termination by Contractor/Consultant
1. In contracts for Infrastructure Projects:
The Contractor may terminate its contract with the Procuring Entity if the
works are completely stopped for a continuous period of at least sixty (60)
calendar days through no fault of its own, due to any of the following
reasons:
a) Failure of the Procuring Entity to deliver, within a reasonable time,
supplies, materials, right-of-way, or other items it is obligated to furnish
under the terms of the contract; or
b) The prosecution of the work is disrupted by the adverse peace and order
situation, as certified by the Armed Forces of the Philippines Provincial
Commander and approved by the Secretary of National Defense.
2. In contracts for Consulting Services:
The Consultant may terminate its agreement with the Procuring Entity if the
latter is in material breach of its obligations pursuant to the contract and has
not remedied the same within sixty (60) calendar days following its receipt of
the Consultant’s notice specifying such breach.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “I”
191
IV. PROCEDURES FOR TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS
1. Verification. Upon receipt of a written report of acts or causes which may
constitute ground(s) for termination as aforementioned, or upon its own
initiative, the Implementing Unit shall, within a period of seven (7) calendar days,
verify the existence of such ground(s) and cause the execution of a Verified
Report, with all relevant evidence attached.
2. Notice to Terminate. Upon recommendation by the Implementing Unit, the
Head of the Procuring Entity shall terminate contracts only by a written notice to
the Supplier/Contractor conveying the termination of the contract. The notice
shall state:
a) that the contract is being terminated for any of the ground(s) aforementioned, and a statement of the acts that constitute the ground(s)
constituting the same;
b) the extent of termination, whether in whole or in part;
c) an instruction to the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant to show cause as to
why the contract should not be terminated; and
d) special instructions of the Procuring Entity, if any.
The Notice to Terminate shall be accompanied by a copy of the Verified Report.
3. Show Cause. Within a period of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the
Notice of Termination, the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant shall submit to the
Head of the Procuring Entity a verified position paper stating why the contract
should not be terminated.
If the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant fails to show cause after the lapse of the
seven (7) day period, either by inaction or by default, the Head of the Procuring
Entity shall issue an order terminating the contract.
4. Rescission of Notice of Termination. The Procuring Entity may, at any time
before receipt of the Supplier’s/Contractor’s/Consultant’s verified position paper
to withdraw the Notice to Terminate if it is determined that certain items or
works subject of the notice had been completed, delivered, or performed before
the Supplier’s/Contractor’s/Consultant’s receipt of the notice.
5. Decision. Within a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days from receipt
of the verified position paper, the Head of the Procuring Entity shall decide
whether or not to terminate the contract. It shall serve a written notice to the
Supplier/Contractor/Consultant of its decision and, unless otherwise provided, the
Contract is deemed terminated from receipt of the
Supplier/Contractor/Consultant of the notice of decision. The termination shall
only be based on the ground(s) stated in the Notice to Terminate.
The 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations – Annex “I”
192
6. Contract Termination Review Committee (CTRC). The Head of the
Procuring Entity may create a committee to assist him in the discharge of his
function under these Guidelines. All decisions recommended by the CTRC shall
be subject to the approval of the Head of the Procuring Entity.
7. Take-over of Contracts. If a Procuring Entity terminates the contract due to
default, insolvency, or for cause, it may enter into a Negotiated Procurement
pursuant to Section 53(c) of R.A. 9184 and 53.3 of its IRR.
8. Procuring Entity’s Options in Termination for Convenience in Contracts
for Goods. The goods that have been performed or are ready for delivery
within thirty (30) calendar days after the Supplier’s receipt of Notice to Terminate
shall be accepted by the Procuring Entity at the contract terms and prices. For
goods not yet performed or ready for delivery, the Procuring Entity may elect:
a) to have any portion delivered or performed and paid at the contract terms
and prices; and/or
b) to cancel the remainder and pay to the Supplier an agreed amount for
partially completed or performed goods and for materials and parts
previously procured by the Supplier.
If the Supplier suffers loss in its initial performance of the terminated contract,
such as purchase of raw materials for goods specially manufactured for the
Procuring Entity which cannot be sold in open market, it shall be allowed to
recover partially from the contract, on a quantum meruit basis. Before
recovery may be made, the fact of loss must be established under oath by the
Supplier to the satisfaction of the Procuring Entity before recovery may be
made.
9. Notice by Contractor/Consultant. The Contractor/Consultant must serve a
written notice to the Procuring Entity of its intention to terminate the contract at
least thirty (30) calendar days before its intended termination. The Contract is
deemed terminated if it is not resumed in thirty (30) calendar days after the
receipt of such notice by the Procuring Entity.
V. AMENDMENTS
1. In the implementation of these Guidelines, the Government Procurement Policy
Board (GPPB) may introduce modifications hereto through the amendment of its
specific provisions as the need arises.
2. Any amendment to these Guidelines shall be applicable to government projects
advertised for bid after the effectivity of the said amendment.
Appendix of the Handbook on Government Procurement
193
APPENDIX
GPPB Guidelines
and Other Issuances
Revised Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure
Projects By Administration
Appendix 1
194
APPENDIX 1
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS BY ADMINISTRATION
1.0 Purpose and Coverage
These guidelines shall provide rules for the implementation of projects “by
administration” by all Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National
Government (NGA), Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations (GOCCs),
Government Financing Institutions (GFIs), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), and
Local Government Units (LGUs).
Projects undertaken “by administration” by the Armed Forces of the Philippines Corps
of Engineers (AFPCOE) shall be governed by the guidelines issued by the GPPB
through Resolution 09-2005 dated 28 April 2005.
2.0 Definition of Terms
For purposes of these guidelines, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
2.1 “By Administration” refers to the procedure by which the implementation of
an infrastructure project is carried out under the administration and supervision
of the concerned agency through its own personnel.
2.2 Implementing Agency refers to any government unit undertaking the
construction of an infrastructure project.
2.3 Job-Contractor refers to a person or entity who carries out, under his own
responsibility, supervision and control, the performance or completion of a
specific job, service or work which has been farmed out by another for the
latter’s benefit.
2.4 Job-order refers to employment of individuals to undertake piece or lump sum
works, or intermittent jobs of short duration not exceeding six months on a
daily basis.
2.5 Labor-only Contractor refers to a person or entity that engages in the supply
of workers/laborers to an employer but does not have substantial capital or
investment in the form of tools, equipment, machineries, work premises,
among others, and the workers recruited and placed perform activities directly
related to the principal business of the employer.
2.6 Pakyaw refers to a system of hiring a labor group for the performance of a
specific work and/or service incidental to the implementation of an
infrastructure project by administration whereby tools and materials are
furnished by the implementing agency. For the specific work/service output, a
lump-sum payment is made either through the group leader or divided among
the pakyaw workers and disbursed using a payroll system.
2.7 Semi-skilled Work/Job refers to a work/job which needs some skills but
does not require doing the more complex work duties. Semi-skilled jobs may
require alertness and close attention to watching machine processes; or
inspecting, testing or otherwise looking for irregularities; or tending or guarding
equipment, property, materials, or persons against loss, damage or injury; or
Revised Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure
Projects By Administration
Appendix 1
195
other types of activities which are similarly less complex than skilled work, but
more complex than unskilled work. A job may be classified as semi-skilled
where coordination and dexterity are necessary, as when hands or feet must be
moved quickly to do repetitive tasks.
2.8 Skilled Work/Job refers to work that requires qualifications in which a person
uses judgment to determine the machine and manual operations in order to
obtain the proper form, quality, or quantity of material to be produced. Skilled
work may require laying out work estimating quality, determining the suitability
and needed quantities of materials, making precise measurements, reading
blueprints or other specifications, or making necessary computations or
mechanical adjustments to control or regulate the work.
2.9 Unskilled Work/Job refers to work which needs little or no judgment that
can be learned on the job in a short period of time. The job may or may not
require considerable strength.
3.0 Conditions and Requirements for the use of “By Administration”
3.1 Projects undertaken by Administration shall be included in the approved Annual
Procurement Plan (APP) of the procuring entity concerned as well as the
procurement of the different project components, i.e. tools and construction
equipment covered under sub-item no. 3.5.
194 Any change to the APP shall be
in accordance with section 7.4 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA no. 9184.
195
3.2 To undertake projects by administration, the implementing agencies must:
a. have a track record of having completed, or supervised a project, by
administration or by contract, similar to and with a cost of at least fifty
percent (50%) of the project at hand, and
b. own the tools and construction equipment to be used or have access to
such tools and equipment owned by other government agencies.
The Department of Public Works and Highways shall validate the track record
and capability of the LGUs, as implementing agencies for nationally funded
projects.196
3.3 Implementing agencies undertaking infrastructure projects by administration
shall comply with the conditions in these guidelines. Further, the technical
supervision and monitoring of these implementing agencies shall be in
accordance with the existing laws, rules and regulations, including these
guidelines and the issuances of the concerned agency.
197
3.4 No contractor shall be used by the procuring entity, or its implementing
agency undertaking infrastructure projects by administration directly or
indirectly for works undertaken by administration.198
194 Amended through GPPB Resolution No. 20-2020, dated October 22, 2020, published in the Philippine Star on December 22,
2020
195 Ibid.
196 Ibid.
197 Ibid.
198 Ibid.
Revised Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure
Projects By Administration
Appendix 1
196
3.5 Procurement of tools and construction equipment shall be subject to the rules
on public bidding.
3.6 For projects funded by the National Government and implemented by a Local
Government Unit, the latter shall be required to post the necessary warranty
security in accordance with Section 62 of RA 9184 and its IRR.199
3.7 The manual labor component of projects undertaken by administration may be
undertaken in-house by the implementing agency concerned, by job-order or
through the pakyaw contracting system. In-house labor is undertaken if the
workers are employees or personnel occupying regular plantilla positions in the
implementing agency. Job-order contracts shall be governed by relevant
Commission on Audit (COA) and/or Civil Service Commission (CSC) rules.
4.0 Pakyaw Contracting System
4.1 Pakyaw labor shall be drawn from the vicinity of the project, or Pakyaw labor
groups belong to various Barangay Associations contiguous to the project site.
Unskilled labor should be drawn from the Barangay where the project is
located; semi-skilled labor shall be recruited within the municipality, preferably
within the Barangay; skilled labor shall be recruited within the province but
preferably within the Barangay/Municipality.
4.2 The formation of Pakyaw Groups should actively involve the Barangay leaders
and the community. A Project Facilitator (PF) shall be appointed by the
implementing agency to assist in the organization of the Pakyaw Groups and in
the preparation of the Pakyaw Contracts. The PF shall, for purposes of
informing the community of the project and of organizing pakyaw groups, shall
convene community meetings, with the assistance of the Barangay
Chairperson/s. The PF shall cause the registration of all unemployed or
underemployed members of the community who are interested to join Pakyaw
groups being formed for the project.
4.3 The Pakyaw workers should be formed into groups of workers based on the
lump sum works. In case of competitive selection, pakyaw groups which were
not selected for a particular lump sum work may choose to compete for other
works requiring pakyaw groups.
4.4 Where there is competition for the award of Pakyaw works, the pakyaw labor
contract shall be awarded through competitive selection with at least three (3)
Pakyaw Groups participating. There is deemed to be a competition for the
award of pakyaw contracts when the number of laborers who registered during
the community meeting is more than what is reasonably needed for the lump
sum work required under the project. The competitive selection shall be done
on a “per-output” basis. And the winner(s) shall be determined based on what
group(s) undertake(s) to deliver the desired output at the lowest rate, either
per item of output or per lump sum work, within the required period.
4.5 For purposes of Item 4.4 hereof, the number of members per group shall be
determined by the Project Facilitator to ensure that at least three Pakyaw
Groups are organized for the competitive selection. The determination by the
Project Facilitator of the number of members per Pakyaw Group shall be
199 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Revised Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure
Projects By Administration
Appendix 1
197
exercised with regard to the objective of providing work to as many laborers as
possible.
4.6 A Group Leader shall be elected from among the members of the group who
shall be the signatory to the Pakyaw Contract and any other documents
pertaining to the work on behalf of the Pakyaw Group. He may be replaced at
any time by the group through an election for that purpose, after due notice to
the Project Facilitator and the Barangay Chairperson. Any such replacement
shall not invalidate any previous Pakyaw Contract.
4.7 In no case may Pakyaw Groups be regular or licensed contractors or organized
by and/or under the management of a regular or licensed contractor. Laborers
supplied by job-contractors/labor-only contractors are likewise disqualified to
become members of the Pakyaw groups when the job-contracting/labor-only
contracting is specifically carried out for the purpose.
4.8 The amount of a pakyaw labor contract per project shall not exceed Five
Hundred Thousand Pesos (₱ 500,000.00) per pakyaw group.
5.0 Repealing Clause
This set of guidelines repeals GPPB Resolution 13-2005 approving and adopting the
Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure Projects through Negotiated
Procurement under Sec. 54.2 (d) of IRR200 of RA 9184 and by Administration.
6.0 Effectivity
These Guidelines or any amendments hereto shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation
and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified
copies of these guidelines.201
200 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
201 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 18-2006, dated 06 December 2006, published in the Official Gazette on 09 April 2007.
Preparation of the Annual Procurement Plan Appendix 2
198
APPENDIX 2
GPPB CIRCULAR 08-2015
PREPARATION OF THE ANNUAL PROCUREMENT PLAN (APP)
1.0 Purpose
1.1. This Circular202 is being issued to reiterate the requirement of preparing the
APP and inform all procuring entities to prepare the APP in the format approved
by the GPPB.
1.2. The accurate preparation of the APP fosters meticulous and judicious
procurement planning at the agency level.
1.3. This is also being issued to clarify that the APP-Common-Use Supplies and
Equipment (APP-CSE), which is to be submitted to the Department of Budget
and Management – Procurement Service (DBM-PS) on or before 15 November
of every year pursuant to Administrative Order (AO) No. 17 Series of 2012, and
DBM Circular Letter No. 2013-14, for the purpose of determining the quarterly
cash requirements for common supplies, materials, and equipment of the
agency and for the over-all management of the central procurement of
common-use supplies and equipment by the DBM-PS, is different from the APP
prescribed by Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9184 and its associated issuances.
2.0 Scope
All Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government including
State Universities and Colleges, Government Owned and/or Controlled Corporations,
Government Financial Institutions, and Local Government Units.
3.0 Preparation and Submission of APP
3.1. Section 7 of R.A. No. 9184 and its revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
(IRR) mandates the preparation of the APP which should include procurements
considered crucial to the efficient discharge of governmental functions.
3.2. On 30 March 2015, the Office of the President issued Administrative Order No.
46 Series of 2015 which included the submission of the APP to the GPPB-TSO
within the first month of the year, and for those who have not submitted, to
comply before the end of April, as one of the measures to speed up the
procurement procedures.
4.0 APP Prescribed Form
4.1. Per GPPB Resolution No. 20-2015,203 the GPPB approved the revised format of
the APP (attached as Annex “A”), to be used by all procuring entities where all
of their procurement activities for the year, including the requirements in its
APP-CSE are reflected.
202 Issued on 16 July 2015.
203 Format of the PMR was amended through GPPB Resolution No. 14-2019 dated 17 July 2019 to reflect Early Procurement
Activities (EPA), published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
Preparation of the Annual Procurement Plan Appendix 2
199
The APP shall contain the following information, among others:
1. Name of the project/procurement;
2. Project management office/end-user unit;
3. General description of the project/procurement;
4. Procurement methods to be adopted;
5. Time schedule for a) advertisement/posting; b) submission and
receipt/opening of bids; c) award of contract; d) contract signing
6. Source of funds; and
7. Approved Budget for the Contract.
5.0 This Circular shall take effect immediately.
6.0 For guidance and compliance.
Preparation of the Annual Procurement Plan Appendix 2
200
Annex A
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
201
APPENDIX 3
GUIDELINES FOR ELECTRONIC BIDDING (E-BIDDING)
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
To promote transparency and efficiency, information and communications technology
shall be utilized in the conduct of procurement procedures. Pursuant to Section 8,
Republic Act 9184 (RA 9184) in relation to Section 8.2.4.3 Rule III of the Revised
Implementing Rules and Regulations (Revised IRR), the Philippine Government
Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS) shall support the implementation of
Electronic Bid (e-Bid) submission processes, which includes creation of electronic bid
forms, creation of bid box, delivery of bid submissions, notification to supplier of
receipt of bids, bid receiving and electronic bid evaluation. This facility shall cover all
types of procurement for goods, infrastructure projects and consulting services.
2.0 SCOPE AND PURPOSE
These Guidelines are formulated to provide rules and procedures that shall apply to
all branches, constitutional commissions and offices, agencies, departments,
bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the Government, including governmentowned and/or controlled corporations (“GOCCs”), government financial institutions
(“GFIs”), state universities and colleges (“SUCs”) and local government units
(“LGUs”) in the procurement of goods, infrastructure projects and consulting services
through electronic means utilizing the PhilGEPS.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1. For purposes of these Guidelines, the following terms, or words and phrases
shall mean or be understood as follows:
3.1.1. Bidder’s On-line Nominee – refers to the person duly authorized by an
On-Line Bidder to create and/or electronically submit electronic
documents comprising the eligibility documentary requirements, and
the technical and financial proposals, and who is issued a Pass Phrase
as the digital signature.
3.1.2. Bid Notice Creator – refers to a member of the Bids and Awards
Committee (BAC) or its Secretariat specifically designated by the BAC
to be responsible for creating the electronic Bid Notices/Supplements,
or by the Head of the Procuring Entity in creating notices of award.
3.1.3. Bid Notice Approver– refers to a member of the BAC Secretariat
specifically designated by the BAC to be responsible for reviewing the
electronic Bid Notices/Supplements created by the Bid Notice Creator,
and approving the uploading and electronic posting/transmittal of Bid
Notices/Supplements in PhilGEPS.
3.1.4. Bid Opener – refers to a member of the BAC or its Secretariat
specifically designated by the BAC to open and record all bid
submissions, decrypt electronic bids, record or input the results of bid
opening, evaluation and post-qualification in the PhilGEPS.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
202
3.1.5. Bid Payment Modality – refers to the mode by which a Registered
Merchant pays the bid document fee directly to the
collecting/disbursing officer of the procuring entity until such time that
the PhilGEPS electronic payment facility becomes available.
3.1.6. Certified Member– refers to a Registered Merchant granted a Certified
Membership Status by PhilGEPS.
3.1.7. Certified Membership Status – refers to a privilege given to a
Registered Merchant that has applied for and paid the annual
administrative fee which enables the member, depending on the
classification, to access and utilize certain functionalities of the
PhilGEPS, such as, automatically receiving Bid Notifications,
downloading of bid documents, electronic submission of bid proposals,
among others.
3.1.8. Document Library – electronic repository of documents uploaded into
PhilGEPS, with controlled accessibility.
3.1.9. Electronic document – refers to information or the representation of
information, data, figures, symbols or other modes of written
expression, described or however represented, by which a right is
established or an obligation extinguished, or by which a fact may be
proved and affirmed, which is received, recorded, transmitted, stored,
processed, retrieved or produced electronically.
3.1.10. On-line Bidder – refers to a Certified Member participating
electronically in bidding.
3.1.11. Pass Phrase – is the unique identifier exclusively provided by the
Bidder’s Online Nominee, all registered users of the agencies, and all
other users of PhilGEPS such as, but not limited to COA Auditors,
NGOs, PhilGEPS Administrator, that is used in encrypting and
decrypting bid submissions.
3.1.12. Portable Document Format (PDF) – refers to a file format that has
captured all the elements of a printed document as an electronic
image that can be viewed, navigated, printed, copied but cannot be
edited or changed.
3.1.13. Registered Merchant – refers to manufacturers, suppliers, distributors,
contractors, and consultants already registered in the GOP-OMR, and
who can access posted bid notices.
3.1.14. Response Forms – refers to technical and financial forms that are
editable and can be populated with information.
3.1.15. System Failure – refers to the PhilGEPS hardware failure or server
software issue such that the system is totally not accessible to users.
It does not refer to the failure of the user’s computer, internet access
or any power interruption, which is beyond the control of the
PhilGEPS.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
203
3.2. Terms, words, and phrases used in these Guidelines shall have the same
meaning as those that are defined in RA 9184 and RA 8792, otherwise known
as the Electronic Commerce Act, and their respective Implementing Rules and
Regulations, and the Guidelines for the Use of the Government of the
Philippines – Official Merchants Registry (GoP-OMR).
4.0 GENERAL GUIDELINES
4.1. All Procuring Entities are mandated to fully use the PhilGEPS in accordance
with RA 9184 and its IRR, and the policies, guidelines, and circulars issued by
the GPPB.
4.2. All Procuring Entities shall register with the PhilGEPS and shall undertake
measures to ensure their access to the on-line network in order to facilitate
open, speedy and efficient on-line transmission, conveyance and use of
electronic data messages or electronic documents. Further, the PhilGEPS shall
assist procuring entities ensure their on-line connectivity and provide training
for their personnel responsible for the operation of the system from their
terminals.
4.3. The rules and regulations governing the manual method of procurement shall
apply whenever the rules in these Guidelines are silent.
4.4. The Invitation to Bid, including the Bidding Documents shall clearly state
whether Electronic Bidding is available for the procurement opportunity.
4.5. The provisions under Section 13 of the IRR on Observers shall apply without
prejudice to full compliance with the requirement under Section 8.7 of the
IRR.
4.6. Only bidders who pay the Bid Document Fee shall be allowed to participate in
the e-bidding activities and submit a bid.
4.7. A procurement process or activity which is suitable for automatic evaluation
by electronic means, without any intervention by the Procuring Entity, shall
be the preferred modality.
4.8. PhilGEPS must establish a user help desk or a call center which offers
centralized customer service (telephone- based service, live chat, e-mails)
and support functions that will both cater to procuring entities and Registered
Merchants to effectively and efficiently address issues and problems during
their procurement operations.
4.9. PhilGEPS and/or the Procuring Entity must provide Online Bidders common
access points to the Internet to enable them to submit electronic bids.
4.10. Prospective bidders, who submit their bids electronically, shall not be allowed
to submit bids manually. Any bid modifications shall likewise be submitted
electronically, provided that this is done before the deadline for submission
and receipt of electronic bids.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
204
4.11. These guidelines shall also apply when procuring entities resort to any of the
Alternative Modes of Procurement specifically Shopping under Section 52.1(b)
and Negotiated Procurement under Section 53.1 (two-failed biddings) and
Section 53.9 (small value procurement), subject to the prior approval of the
Head of the Procuring Entity in order to promote economy and efficiency, and
whenever justified by the conditions provided in RA 9184 and its IRR.
5.0 INVITATION TO BID (IB)
5.1. Procuring Entities, through their respective Bid Notice Creators, shall create
an electronic Invitation to Bid in accordance with the contents provided for
under Section 21.1 of the IRR of RA 9184 to provide prospective bidders
sufficient information for the contract to be bid (“Bid Notices”) using the
electronic bid facility under PhilGEPS. Only Bid Notices that have been
verified and approved by the Bid Notice Approver shall be posted in the
PhilGEPS Electronic Bulletin Board.
5.2. Procuring Entities shall upload a complete set of bidding documents in the
PhilGEPS website which will be available from the time the Bid Notice is
posted, and which PDF version can be downloaded free of charge by
Registered Merchants until the deadline for the submission and receipt of
bids.
5.3. Registered Merchants who have set their bid-match profiles shall
automatically be notified through electronic mail (e-mail) and/or through the
Registered Merchant’s respective PhilGEPS “Pending Task” page of posted Bid
Notices.
5.4. Only Registered Merchants who pay the Bid Document Fee through the Bid
Payment Modality shall be allowed to download complete bidding documents
and bid response forms.
6.0 PRE-BID CONFERENCE
6.1. For contracts to be bid where the conduct of Pre-Bid Conference is required
under Section 22 of the IRR, the same procedure governing the manual
method will also apply.
6.2. Procuring Entities with videoconferencing capabilities may conduct their prebidding conferences electronically provided that their Registered Merchants
shall also have similar capabilities and facilities.
6.3. During the conduct of the Pre-Bid Conference, Registered Merchants may
send requests for clarification through the PhilGEPS online facility, which shall
be read during the meeting and shall form part of the minutes, unless the
Procuring Entity has previously decided that only those who have purchased
the Bidding Documents shall be allowed to participate in the pre-bid
conference and raise or submit written queries or clarifications.
6.4. The minutes of the pre-bid conference shall be recorded as an electronic
document made electronically available to all participating Registered
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
205
Merchants through the PhilGEPS Electronic Bulletin Board not later than three
(3) calendar days after the pre-bid conference.
6.5. Requests for clarification(s) on any part of the Bidding Documents or for an
interpretation must be in writing and submitted to the BAC of the procuring
entity concerned, either electronically through PhilGEPS or otherwise, at least
ten (10) calendar days before the deadline set for the submission and receipt
of bids.
6.6. Only Bid Bulletins/Supplements approved by the Bid Notice Approver shall be
posted in the PhilGEPS at least seven (7) calendar days before the deadline
for the submission and receipt of bids. PhilGEPS shall automatically notify
through e-mail all Registered Merchants who have downloaded the bidding
documents and paid the Bid Document Fee.
7.0 REGISTRY SYSTEM
7.1. To facilitate determination of eligibility, and subject to the GOP-OMR
guidelines, procuring entities may use the registry system of PhilGEPS that
allows submission and/or recording/entry of eligibility requirements
simultaneously with registration.
7.2. Only a Certified Member with the appropriate classification can avail of the
PhilGEPS advance eligibility submission by uploading their electronic
documents to the PhilGEPS document library, which can be accessed for
current or future procurements.
7.3. Submission of eligibility requirements to the PhilGEPS document library is not
tantamount to a finding of eligibility.
8.0 SUBMISSION OF BIDS
8.1. On-line Bidders may submit their eligibility requirements to the Procuring
Entity through the e-bidding facility of PhilGEPS.
8.2. Joint Ventures
8.2.1. In case of joint venture, each partner of the joint venture must: (i) be
registered in the PhilGEPS, (ii) secure Certified Membership Status,
and (iii) electronically send their respective eligibility documents.
8.2.2. The joint venture partners must identify and designate the Primary
and Secondary Partner(s).
8.2.3. Before the PhilGEPS will accept submissions of technical and financial
proposals from the Primary Partner, there must be a confirmation
from the Secondary Partner(s) as to existence of, or agreement to
enter into, a joint venture.
8.2.4. Upon Confirmation, the Primary Partner shall be required by PhilGEPS
to upload the Joint Venture Agreement or a duly notarized statement.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
206
8.3. On-line Bidders, or the Primary Partner in the case of Joint Ventures, shall
electronically submit their bids through the Bidder’s On-line Nominee, at any
time before the closing date and time specified in the bidding documents.
8.4. The actual time of bid submission of an On-line Bidder shall be the time
indicated on the PhilGEPS Server when the bidder clicks the “Submit” button
which shall be automatically recorded by PhilGEPS. Upon receipt of a bid, the
PhilGEPS shall automatically generate a bid receipt page that can be printed
by the on-line bidder. This contains the recorded “submission time” which
shall be considered as the Official Submission Time of the bidder.
8.5. An On-line Bidder may modify its bid at any time before the closing date and
time for the submission and receipt of bids.
8.6. An On-line Bidder may withdraw its bid before the deadline for the
submission and receipt of bids.
8.7. The PhilGEPS shall bar all incoming bids after the closing date and time.
9.0 BID SECURITY
9.1. On-line bidders may submit the bid security in cash through the PhilGEPS
electronic payment facility.
9.2. In case of other forms of bid security, the on-line bidder shall prepare and
submit a scanned copy of the bid security together with the electronic bid.
However, the original bid security must be submitted to the BAC concerned
before the end of business hours on the day of bid submission, a failure of
which shall automatically render the bid submission as non-compliant.
9.3. If the on-line bidder sends the original bid security through registered mail or
private courier, the indicated date of receipt by the postal service or private
courier shall be considered as the date of submission to the BAC concerned,
without prejudice to any verifications during post-qualification.
10.0 EXTENSION OF BID CLOSING DATE
10.1. In case of system failure, the rules provided for in Annex 1 shall
automatically apply regarding extension of the bid closing date.
11.0 OPENING OF BIDS
11.1. Upon receipt of manually-filed bids, the Bid Opener, before the Bid Opening,
but immediately after the deadline for submission of bids, shall record and
input into PhilGEPS E-bidding module the date and time each of the bid was
manually received, including the name of the bidder’s authorized
representative.
11.2. The BAC shall open the bids immediately after the deadline for submission
and receipt of bids, and on the bid opening date.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
207
11.3. Before the decryption of electronic bids, the Bid Opener must first login to
PhilGEPS and only then can BAC members input their respective USER IDs
and PASSWORDS, provided however, that PhilGEPS decryption will not take
place unless all the members present and logging-in constitute quorum.
11.4. The Bid Opener shall publicly open the first bid envelopes of bidders who
submitted bids manually to determine each bidder’s compliance with the
documents required to be submitted for eligibility, that is, legal, technical
and financial eligibility documents; and for the technical requirements. For
this purpose, the BAC shall check the submitted documents of each bidder
against a checklist of required documents to ascertain if they are all present,
using a non-discretionary “pass/fail” criterion. If a bidder submits the
required document, it shall be rated “passed” for that particular requirement.
In this regard, bids that fail to include any requirement or are incomplete or
patently insufficient shall be considered as “failed”. Otherwise, the BAC shall
rate the bidder “passed” in relation to the eligibility and technical documents
in the first envelope.
11.5. After all the manually submitted first envelopes of bidders were opened, and
the results and findings were encoded in the PhilGEPS Preliminary
Examination Report facility, the Bid Opener shall thereafter proceed to
decrypt the electronic First Bid Envelopes submitted by the On-line Bidders
to determine each bidder’s compliance with the required eligibility and
technical documents following the steps and procedures outlined in Section
11.4 hereof. Thereafter, the Bid Opener shall input the findings and results
into the PhilGEPS’ Preliminary Examination Report facility.
11.6. Immediately after determining compliance with the requirements in the first
envelope, the Bid Opener shall forthwith open the manually submitted
second bid envelope of each eligible bidder whose first bid envelope was
rated “passed.” The second envelope of each complying bidder shall be
opened within the same day.
11.7. After all the manually submitted second envelopes of bidders were opened,
and the results and findings were encoded in the PhilGEPS Preliminary
Examination Report facility, the Bid Opener shall thereafter proceed to
decrypt the electronic Second Bid Envelopes of each On-line Bidders whose
electronic first bid envelope was rated “passed” to determine each bidder’s
compliance with the required financial documents following the steps and
procedures outlined in Section 11.6 hereof.
11.8. In case one or more of the requirements in the second envelope of a
particular bid is missing, incomplete or patently insufficient, and/or if the
submitted total bid price exceeds the ABC, the BAC shall rate the bid
concerned as “failed”. The Bid Opener shall then input the findings and
results into the PhilGEPS’ Preliminary Examination Report facility.
Only bids that are determined to contain all the bid requirements for both
components shall be rated “passed” and shall immediately be considered for
evaluation and comparison.
11.9. PhilGEPS shall automatically send an electronic mail to all bidders who failed
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
208
in the preliminary examination of the first and/or second envelope.
12.0 BID EVALUATION
Goods and Infrastructure
For the procurement of goods and infrastructure projects, the purpose of bid
evaluation is to determine the Lowest Calculated Bid using the following steps:
12.1. The BAC shall immediately conduct a detailed evaluation of all bids using
non-discretionary criteria in considering the following:
a) Completeness of the bid. Unless the Instructions to Bidders specifically
allow partial bids, bids not addressing or providing all of the required
items in the Bidding Documents including, where applicable, bill of
quantities, shall be considered non-responsive and, thus, automatically
disqualified. In this regard, where a required item is provided, but no
price is indicated, the same shall be considered as non-responsive, but
specifying a “0” (zero) or dash (-) for the said item would mean that it
is being offered for free to the Government; and
b) Arithmetical corrections. Correct computational errors and omissions to
enable proper comparison of all eligible bids. It may also consider bid
modifications if expressly allowed in the Bidding Documents. Any
adjustment shall be calculated in monetary terms to determine the
calculated prices. (a)
12.2. The BAC shall evaluate all bids on an equal footing to ensure fair and
competitive bid comparison. For this purpose, all bidders shall be required
to include the cost of all taxes, such as, but not limited to, value added tax
(VAT), income tax, local taxes, and other fiscal levies and duties which shall
be itemized in the bid form and reflected in the detailed estimates. Such
bids, including said taxes, shall be the basis for bid evaluation and
comparison.
12.3. In case of discrepancies between: (a) bid prices in figures and in words, the
latter shall prevail; (b) total price of the item and unit price of the item as
extended or multiplied by the quantity of that item, the latter shall prevail;
(c) stated total price and the actual sum of prices of component items, the
latter shall prevail; (d) unit cost in the detailed estimate and unit cost in the
bill of quantities, the latter shall prevail.
12.4. Bids shall then be ranked in the ascending order of their total calculated bid
prices, as evaluated and corrected for computational errors, and other bid
modifications, to identify the Lowest Calculated Bid. Total calculated bid
prices, as evaluated and corrected for computational errors, and other bid
modifications, which exceed the ABC shall be disqualified.
12.5. After all bids have been received, opened, examined, evaluated, and ranked,
the BAC shall prepare the corresponding Abstract of Bids. All members of
the BAC shall sign the Abstract of Bids and attach thereto all the bids with
their corresponding bid securities and the minutes or proceedings of the
bidding. The Abstract of Bids shall contain the following:
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
209
a) Name of the contract and its location, if applicable;
b) Time, date and place of bid opening; and
c) Names of bidders and their corresponding calculated bid prices
arranged from lowest to highest, the amount of bid security and the
name of the issuing entity.
The entire evaluation process for the procurement of goods and
infrastructure projects shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days
from the deadline for receipt of proposals. However, for infrastructure
projects costing Fifty Million Pesos (₱ 50,000,000) and below, the entire
evaluation process shall be completed in not more than five (5) calendar
days from the deadline for receipt of proposals.
12.6. After conducting the detailed evaluation of all bids using non-discretionary
criterion, the Bid Opener shall input and record the results of the evaluation
into the PhilGEPS’ Evaluation Summary Report facility.
12.7. The PhilGEPS shall automatically rank the bidders in ascending order based
on their total calculated bid prices to identify the LCB as evaluated and
corrected for computational errors, and other bid modifications. Total
calculated bid prices, as evaluated and corrected for computational errors,
and other bid modifications, which exceed the ABC shall be disqualified.
After all bids have been received, opened, examined, evaluated, and ranked,
the system shall thereafter generate the Abstract of Bids in the form of
PhilGEPS Evaluation Summary Report.
12.8. The BAC shall manually prepare a Resolution whether approving or denying
the Abstract of Bids generated by the system. However, after the BAC
Resolution approving the Abstract of Bids is uploaded in the PhilGEPS, an
electronic message shall be automatically sent to all bidders who participated
informing them that the Abstract of Bids is available for downloading.
Consulting Services
12.9. To determine the Highest Rated Bid (HRB), the BAC shall immediately
conduct a detailed evaluation of all bids using the steps provided for under
Section 33 of the IRR of RA 9184.
12.10. After conducting the detailed evaluation of all bids using non-discretionary
criteria, the Bid Opener shall input and record the results of the evaluation
into the PhilGEPS’ Summary Report facility.
12.11. The PhilGEPS shall automatically rank the bidders in descending order
based on their total score to identify the HRB. After all bids have been
received, opened, examined, evaluated, and ranked, the system shall
thereafter generate the Abstract of Bids.
12.12. The BAC shall manually prepare a Resolution whether approving or denying
the Abstract of Bids generated by the system. However, after the BAC
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
210
Resolution approving the Abstract of Bids is uploaded in the PhilGEPS, an
electronic message shall be automatically sent to all bidders who
participated informing them that the Abstract of Bids is available for
downloading.
13.0 POST QUALIFICATION
13.1 The Lowest Calculated Bid (“LCB”)/Highest Rated Bid (“HRB”) shall undergo
post-qualification pursuant to Rule X of the IRR in order to determine
whether the bidder concerned complies with and is responsive to all the
requirements and conditions as specified in the Bidding Documents.
13.2 Within one (1) day after the approval of the Abstract of Bids, the bidder with
the LCB/HRB should be notified through electronic mail that the bidder shall
undergo post-qualification and submit the post-qualification requirements
within three (3) calendar days as provided for under Section 34.2 of the IRR.
13.3 If the BAC determines that the bidder with the LCB/HRB passes all the
criteria for post-qualification, it shall declare the said bid as the Lowest
Calculated Responsive Bid (LCRB)/ Highest Rated Responsive Bid (HRRB),
and recommend to the Head of the Procuring Entity the award of contract to
the said bidder at its submitted bid price or its calculated bid price,
whichever is lower or, in the case of quality-based evaluation procedure,
submitted bid price or its negotiated price, whichever is lower.
13.4 If, however, the BAC determines that the bidder with the LCB/HRB fails the
criteria for post-qualification, it shall immediately notify the said bidder
electronically in writing of its post-disqualification and the grounds for it.
13.5 Immediately after the BAC has electronically notified the first bidder of its
post-disqualification, and notwithstanding any pending request for
reconsideration thereof, the BAC shall initiate and complete the same postqualification process on the bidder with the second LCB/HRB. If the second
bidder passes the post-qualification, and provided that the request for
reconsideration of the first bidder has been denied, the second bidder shall
be post-qualified as the bidder with the LCRB/HRRB.
13.6 If the second bidder, however, fails the post-qualification, the procedure for
post-qualification shall be repeated for the bidder with the next LCB/HRB,
and so on until the LCRB or HRRB, as the case may be, is determined for
award, subject to Section 37 of the IRR.
13.7 The post-qualification process shall be completed in not more than seven (7)
calendar days from the determination of the LCB/HRB. In exceptional cases,
the post-qualification period may be extended by the Head of the Procuring
Entity, but in no case shall the aggregate period exceed thirty (30) calendar
days.
13.8 The BAC or its Bid Opener shall record and encode the post-qualification
results of manually submitted documents in the PhilGEPS. For electronic
documents submitted online, the BAC or its Bid Opener shall decrypt the
documents and the results recorded automatically.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
211
13.9 After recording the post-qualification summary and uploading the BAC
resolution declaring the bidder with the LCRB/HRRB in the PhilGEPS, an
electronic message shall be automatically sent to all bidders who participated
informing them that the Notice of LCRB/HRRB is available for downloading.
14.0 AWARD
14.1 The BAC shall recommend to the Head of the Procuring Entity the award of
contract to the bidder with the LCRB/HRRB or the Single Calculated/Rated
Responsive Bid after the post-qualification process has been completed.
To facilitate the approval of the award, the BAC shall submit the following
supporting documents to the Head of the Procuring Entity:
a) Resolution of the BAC recommending award;
b) Abstract of Bids;
c) Duly approved program of work or delivery schedule, and Cost
Estimates;
d) Document issued by appropriate entity authorizing the procuring
entity to incur obligations for a specified amount; and
e) Other pertinent documents required by existing laws, rules, and/or the
procuring entity concerned.
14.2 In case of approval, the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) shall
immediately issue the Notice of Award to the bidder with the LCRB/HRRB.
In the event the Head of the Procuring Entity shall disapprove such
recommendation, such disapproval shall be based only on valid, reasonable,
and justifiable grounds to be expressed in writing, copy furnished the BAC.
14.3 Upon approval by the HOPE of the BAC recommendation to award the
contract to the LCRB/HRRB, the Notice of Award (“NOA”) shall be created by
the Bid Notice Creator in the PhilGEPS upon instruction of the HOPE,
provided however, that the NOA shall only be created and issued to the
LCRB/HRRB if no request for reconsideration or protest is received by, or
inputted in PhilGEPS.
14.4 Upon issuance of the NOA to the LCRB/HRRB, an electronic message shall
be automatically sent to all bidders who participated informing them of the
results of the bidding process.
14.5 Notwithstanding the issuance of the Notice of Award, the award of the
contract shall be subject to the following conditions:
a) Submission of the following documents within the prescribed period:
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
212
i) Valid JVA, if applicable, within ten (10) calendar days from receipt
by the bidder of the notice from the BAC that the bidder has the
LCRB or HRRB, as the case may be; or
ii) In the case of infrastructure projects, valid PCAB license and
registration for the type and cost of the contract to be bid for
foreign bidders, within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt by
the bidder of the notice from the BAC that the bidder has the
LCRB, when the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement
expressly allows submission of the PCAB license and registration
for the type and cost of the contract to be as a pre-condition to
the Notice of Award;
b) Posting of performance security in accordance with Section 39 of this
IRR;
c) Signing of the contract as provided in Section 37.2 of the IRR; and
d) Approval by higher authority, if required, as provided in Section 37.3
of the IRR.
14.6 Contract award shall be made within the bid validity period provided in
Section 28 of the IRR.
14.7 The BAC, through the Secretariat, shall post, within three (3) calendar days
from its issuance, the Notice of Award in the PhilGEPS, the website of the
procuring entity, if any, and any conspicuous place in the premises of the
procuring entity.
14.8 After the contract signing and submission of the Performance Bond, the Bid
Notice Creator shall update the “proceed date” and the “contract start and
end dates” and upload a copy of the Notice to Proceed and approved
Contract in the PhilGEPS.
15.0 APPLICATION OF RA 9184 AND ITS REVISED IRR
In case of silence, ambiguity, or vagueness of the provision embodied in this
Guidelines, the procedures and processes contained in RA 9184 and its revised IRR
shall suppletorily apply.
16.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) calendar days after its publication in
the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation.204
204 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 23-2013, dated 30 July 2013, and published in The Daily Tribune on 03 November 2014.
Guidelines for Electronic Bidding Appendix 3
213
Annex 1
System Downtime
Coverage Extension Automatic Extension of
Bid Closing Time
less than2 hours within 6
hours prior to bid closing
time/date
No None
Greater than 2 hours Yes
24 Hours after the
PhilGEPS system has
been restored
Within 2 hours prior to
bid closing time Yes
24 hours after the
PhilGEPS system has
been restored
> 24 hours prior to bid
closing time Yes
48 hours after the
PhilGEPS system has
been restored
> 48 hours prior to bid
closing time Yes
72 Hours after the
PhilGEPS system has
been restored
Guidelines for the use of the GOP-OMR Appendix 4
214
APPENDIX 4
GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES -
OFFICIAL MERCHANTS REGISTRY (GoP-OMR)
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
To promote transparency and efficiency, information and communications technology
shall be utilized in the conduct of procurement procedures. Accordingly, there shall
be a single portal that shall serve as the primary source of information on all
government procurement. (Section 8, Republic Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184); Section
8.1.1, Rule III, Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (Revised IRR))
The Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS) shall serve as
the primary and definitive source of information on government procurement. (Sec.
8.1.1, Rule III, Revised IRR)
2.0 SCOPE AND PURPOSE
These Guidelines shall govern the general procedures for the use of the Government
of the Philippines-Official Merchants Registry (“GoP-OMR”), the electronic database
developed and maintained by PhilGEPS pursuant to Section 8.2.2 of the Revised IRR
of R.A. 9184.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1. For purposes of these Guidelines, the following terms, or words and phrases
shall mean or be understood as follows:
3.1.1. Government of the Philippines-Official Merchants Registry
(GoP-OMR) – refers to the centralized electronic database of
manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors, and consultants
developed and maintained by the PhilGEPS office pursuant to Section
8.2.2 of the Revised IRR of R.A. 9184.
3.1.2. Merchant – refers to manufacturers, suppliers, distributors,
contractors, and consultants already registered or still applying for
registration in the GoP-OMR.
3.2. Terms, words, and phrases used in these Guidelines shall have the same
meaning as those that are defined in R.A. 9184 and its Revised Implementing
Rules and Regulations.
4.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.1 The GoP-OMR shall be the centralized electronic database of merchants for
purposes of government electronic procurement.
Subject to Sections 7 to 9 herein, all existing registries of merchants,
electronic or manual, used and maintained by procuring entities for
government procurement shall be integrated with the GoP-OMR.
4.2 The PhilGEPS office shall not determine the eligibility of merchants. The
PhilGEPS office’s evaluation of the eligibility requirements shall be for the sole
Guidelines for the use of the GOP-OMR Appendix 4
215
purpose of determining the approval or disapproval of the merchant’s
application for registration.
4.3 A merchant’s registration and membership in the GoP-OMR is neither
contract-specific nor understood to be tantamount to a finding of eligibility.
Neither shall the merchant’s successful registration in the GoP-OMR be relied
upon to claim eligibility for the purpose of participation in any public bidding.
4.4 The determination of the eligibility of merchants, whether registered with the
GoP-OMR or not, shall remain with the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC).
The BAC’s determination of the validity of the Certificate of Registration and
Membership in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of the 2016 revised
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184, in
lieu of the submission of, and supported by, the current and updated Class
“A” eligibility requirements covered by the same afore-cited Section of the
same IRR and other eligibility documents covered by Section 23 and 24 of the
same IRR shall be conclusive to enable the merchant to participate in the
public bidding process. 205
5.0 REGISTRATION AND MEMBERSHIP OF MERCHANTS
5.1 The PhilGEPS office shall develop and implement the necessary procedures for
the registration and membership of merchants in the GoP-OMR.
5.2 Subject to Section 6, the procedures for registration of merchants shall prescribe
the following requirements:
5.2.1 duly accomplished PhilGEPS Registration Form;
5.2.2 an account number with a bank duly licensed by the Bangko Sentral
ng Pilipinas (BSP), which shall be used to facilitate financial
transactions such as, but not limited to, the payment of fees;
charges; bid, performance, and warranty securities; and similar
costs;
5.2.3 a secure e-mail address, which shall be used for all communications
between the BAC and the PE;
5.2.4 a digital certificate secured from the government-accredited
certification authority, once such facility becomes available.
5.2.5 eligibility requirements as provided in R.A. 9184 and its Revised IRR;
and,
5.2.6 a certification, stating that (a) the eligibility requirements filed in
connection with registration in the GoP-OMR, are authentic copies of
the original; (b) the same requirements are complete; and (c) all
statements and information provided in these are true and correct.
5.3 Merchants shall submit their registration documents either by sending
electronic copies of the requirements using the PhilGEPS website; or by
sending printed copies to the PhilGEPS office.
205 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
Guidelines for the use of the GOP-OMR Appendix 4
216
Failure to submit the registration requirements prescribed in Section 5.2
herein shall result in the disapproval of the application for registration.
5.4 The PhilGEPS office shall receive and process all applications for registration,
and shall have the sole power to approve or disapprove any application in
accordance with its registration procedures, subject to existing laws, rules
and regulations, and these Guidelines.
5.5 Approval of the application shall amount to the registration of the merchant in
the GoP-OMR. Disapproval shall prevent the registration of the merchant in
the GoP-OMR until such time that it satisfactorily complies with the
requirements.
5.6 The PhilGEPS office shall deny registration to or exclude from the GoP-OMR
any merchant (a) that is found to have willfully misrepresented any of the
information provided in the application for registration, or (b) that is in the
“blacklist” of a PE. For this purpose, exclusion from the registry shall result in
the cancellation of the merchant’s account in the PhilGEPS website.
5.6.1 This exclusionary rule also applies to any merchant that has been
subjected to the blacklisting rules of foreign governments, and
foreign or international financing institutions, if such rules have been
recognized by the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB).
5.6.2 The PE shall immediately notify the PhilGEPS office and the GPPB
regarding its “blacklisting” of a merchant by forwarding a copy of
the Blacklisting Order to PhilGEPS and GPPB. Upon receipt of the
Blacklisting Order, the PhilGEPS office shall exclude the merchant
from the GoP-OMR.
6.0 MEMBERSHIP CLASSIFICATION
6.1 The PhilGEPS office shall develop a merchants’ membership classification that
will define the extent of a merchant’s access to and use of the PhilGEPS
website, and include the rules and procedures for acquiring, maintaining,
relinquishing, changing, or renewing a membership status in the registration
procedure mentioned in Section 5.1 hereof.
6.2 Merchants shall have the option to choose its membership classification based
on the categories provided by the PhilGEPS office. Merchants shall be entitled
to a Certificate of Registration and Membership depending on the chosen
classification and payment of the corresponding membership fee determined
by the PhilGEPS office.
6.3 The Certificate of Registration and Membership in accordance with Section
8.5.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184 shall be valid and effective for a
period of one (1) year from the date of issuance as indicated therein. This
Certificate may be either renewed, in case of expiration, or updated within the
period for its validity; provided, that the merchant maintains its records in the
GoP-OMR current and updated at least once a year or more frequently as
Guidelines for the use of the GOP-OMR Appendix 4
217
may be necessary and complies with the procedures laid down by the
PhilGEPS office for processing its renewal or updating, respectively.
206
For the purpose of updating the said Certificate, the merchant’s failure to
maintain its records current and updated shall result in the automatic
suspension of validity of its Certificate of Registration and Membership in
accordance with Section 8.5.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184 until such
time that the records have been updated in accordance with the procedures
of the PhilGEPS office, notwithstanding the fact that the one-year validity of
the Certificate of Membership has not yet expired.207
6.4 The Certificate of Registration and Membership in accordance with Section
8.5.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184 contains the following caveat to
reflect that through the submission of said Certificate, the Bidder certifies:
a. the authenticity, genuineness, validity, and completeness of the copy
of the original eligibility documents submitted;
b. the veracity of the statements and information contained therein;
c. that the Certificate is not a guaranty that the named registrant will be
declared eligible without first being determined to be such for that
particular bidding nor is it evidence that the same has passed the
post-qualification stage; and
d. that any finding of concealment, falsification, or misrepresentation of
any of the eligibility documents submitted, or the contents thereof
shall be a ground for disqualification of the Bidder from further
participation in the bidding process, without prejudice to the
imposition of appropriate administrative, civil and criminal penalty in
accordance with the laws
It shall likewise state that for the purpose of updating the said Certificate, all Class
“A” Eligibility Documents covered by Section 8.5.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA
9184 supporting the veracity, authenticity and validity of the Certificate shall remain
current and updated, and that failure by the prospective bidder to update its
Certificate with the current and updated Class “A” Eligibility Documents covered by
the afore-cited Section of the same IRR shall result in the automatic suspension of
the validity of its Certificate until such time that all of the expired Class “A” Eligibility
Documents has been updated.208
7.0 INTEGRATION OF EXISTING ELECTRONIC REGISTRIES
7.1 The following rules shall apply only to electronic registries that
simultaneously allow submission and/or recording/entry of eligibility
requirements with registration:
206 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
207 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
208 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2021, dated 14 October 2021, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2021.
Guidelines for the use of the GOP-OMR Appendix 4
218
7.2 All existing electronic merchant registries used and maintained by PEs shall
be integrated into the GoP-OMR. Upon integration, the PE shall henceforth
use the GoP-OMR for government procurement purposes, and shall cease
using the prior registry.
7.3 The PE shall coordinate with the PhilGEPS office to determine whether the
existing registry is compatible with the GoP-OMR.
7.4 After a finding of compatibility, the PE shall integrate its registry with the
GoP-OMR.
If the registries are incompatible, the PE shall cease using its registry and use the
GoP-OMR. The PE shall be given sufficient amount of time to effect the shutdown of
its electronic registry and the shift to the use of the GoP-OMR. The PE and the
PhilGEPS office shall coordinate with each other for this purpose.
8.0 REGISTRIES WITH OTHER FUNCTIONALITIES
If a PE uses and maintains an electronic registry with functionalities aside from
submission and/or recording of eligibility requirements, it shall use the GoP-OMR as
its merchant registry but may be allowed to continue using the other functionalities
of its system.
9.0 MANUAL REGISTRIES
PEs that maintain manual registries shall be encouraged to shift to the use of the
GoP-OMR. If the PE decides to retain the use of its manual registry, it may do so;
provided, however, that when the PE shifts to an electronic registry, it shall use the
facilities of the GoP-OMR. After the shift, the PE shall henceforth use the GoP-OMR
for government procurement purposes.
10.0 AMENDMENTS
In the implementation of these Guidelines, the Government Procurement Policy
Board (GPPB) may introduce modifications through the amendment of its provisions
as the need arises.
11.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation, and upon filing with the
University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of these
guidelines.209
209 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 12-2012, dated 1 June 2012, and published in The Daily Tribune on 28 December 2012.
Procurement Monitoring Report Format Appendix 5
219
APPENDIX 5
GPPB CIRCULAR 03-2015
PROCUREMENT MONITORING REPORT (PMR) FORMAT
1.0 Purpose
This Circular210 is being issued to remind the Procuring Entities of the requirement on
the submission of the PMR for every semester in accordance with Section 12.2 of the
IRR of RA 9184.
2.0 Coverage
All Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government
including State Universities and Colleges, Government-Owned and/or Controlled
Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, and Local Government Units.
3.0 Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR)
3.1 2012 CPAR
The 2012 Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) noted that the
results of the APCPI yield a 41% compliance rate for the preparation of PMRs
among the pilot agencies, and a lower rate of 18% for the posting of these
reports at the agency websites.
3.2 GPPB Data
When consolidated into a national database, information from the annual
PMR will serve as a source for national procurement statistics and the
Government Procurement Policy Board can use the data to analyze
performance, trends, and reform-related issues.
4.0 Procurement Monitoring Report and Submission to GPPB
4.1 The Procurement Monitoring Report (PMR) is a semestral report on
procurement activities specified in the Annual Procurement Plan (APP),
whether ongoing and completed. The PMR shall cover major activities from
the holding of the pre-procurement conference to the issuance of notice of
award, the approval of the contract, delivery/completion, and
acceptance/turnover, including the standard and actual time for each major
procurement activity. (Section 1.2, IRR of EO 662)
4.2 Pursuant to Sections 12.1of the IRR of RA 9184, PMR shall be approved and
submitted by the HOPE to the GPPB in printed and electronic format211 within
fourteen (14) calendar days after the end of each semester.
5.0 This Circular shall take effect immediately.
6.0 For guidance and compliance.
210 Issued on 20 March 2015.
211 Format of the PMR was amended through GPPB Resolution No. 14-2019, dated 17 July 2019, to reflect Early Procurement
Activities (EPA), published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
Procurement Monitoring Report Format Appendix 5
220
Confidentiality Agreement Format Appendix 6
221
APPENDIX 6
CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT FORMAT
OBSERVERS CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT
This CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT (hereinafter “Agreement”) is made and entered into
this day of , , by and between:
(date) (month) (year)
(First party’s details)
and
(Second party’s details)
DEFINITION OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
1. As used in this Agreement, “confidential information” shall mean all information and
materials including, without limitation, market analyses, cost estimates, technical
specifications, evaluation criteria and results, and any documentation, analyses,
compilations, forecasts, studies or other procurement-related documents prepared
based on any of the foregoing that is provided by the party disclosing (“Disclosing
Party”) to the party receiving (“Receiving Party”) information under this Agreement,
whether oral, written, or in any other medium.
HANDLING OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
2. The Receiving Party shall maintain the secrecy of the Disclosing Party’s Confidential
Information and shall exert all reasonable efforts to preserve the confidentiality of
such information, including, but not limited to, the implementation of reasonable
physical security measures and operating procedures.
3. The Receiving Party agrees that at all times and notwithstanding any termination or
expiration of this Agreement, it will hold in strict confidence and not disclose to any
third party all Confidential Information received from the Disclosing Party, except as
approved in writing by the latter. The receiving party shall be prohibited from using
the Confidential Information for purposes other than compliance with its obligations
as an Observer under Republic At 9184 and its Implementing Rules and Regulations.
4. Access to Confidential Information of the Disclosing Party shall only be granted by the
Receiving Party to its employees or authorized representatives, when their knowledge
of such information becomes necessary, provided that such persons have signed
confidentiality agreements or are otherwise bound by confidentiality obligations which
contain the minimum terms, restrictions and limitations provided herein.
Confidentiality Agreement Format Appendix 6
222
PERIOD AND TERMINATION
5. This Agreement shall be effective for a period of , and shall
automatically terminate thereafter. Notwithstanding the termination or expiration of
this Agreement, all obligations contained therein shall remain valid, effective and
binding upon the Receiving Party, his successors and assigns.
6. Upon termination or expiration of this Agreement, or otherwise upon the Disclosing
Party’s request, all Confidential Information furnished to the Receiving Party shall be
promptly returned to the Disclosing Party, or at the Disclosing Party’s express request,
shall be destroyed. In case of destruction as requested by the Disclosing Party, the
same shall be confirmed in writing by the Receiving Party.
EQUITABLE REMEDIES
7. The Receiving Party acknowledges that any breach of this Agreement may cause
irreparable harm to the Disclosing Party for which the latter is entitled to seek, among
others, indemnification for damages, as well as injunctive or other equitable remedies
as may be allowed by law.
MISCELLANEOUS
8. The Receiving Party shall not transfer or assign this Agreement to any other person or
entity, whether by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior written consent of
the Disclosing Party. Any such attempted assignment shall be void and of no effect.
9. In case any provision of this Agreement is declared by a competent authority to be
unenforceable or invalid, such declaration shall not render this Agreement
unenforceable or invalid as a whole. The unenforceable or invalid provision shall be
changed and interpreted so as to best accomplish the objectives of such provision,
subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.
10. This Agreement is the complete and exclusive agreement regarding the disclosure of
Confidential Information between the parties, and replaces or supersedes any and all
prior oral or written communications and agreements between the parties regarding
Confidential Information without prejudice to the rules and regulations concerning
restrictions on disclosure of information such as on matters involving national
security, diplomatic or foreign relations, intelligence and other classified information.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Confidentiality
Agreement as of the date and year first above written.
SIGNED IN THE PRESENCE OF:
[ACKNOWLEDGMENT]
Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Government Personnel
Involved in Government Procurement
Appendix 7
223
APPENDIX 7
GUIDELINES ON THE GRANT OF HONORARIA TO GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL
INVOLVED IN GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
DBM BUDGET CIRCULAR 2004-5A212
1.0 Background
Budget Circular (BC) No. 2004-5A, dated March 23, 2004, provides the guidelines on
the grant of honoraria to government personnel involved in government procurement
consistent with Republic Act 9184 (Government Procurement Reform Act). Certain
provisions thereof need further clarification particularly on the entitlement to
honoraria when alternative modes of procurement are used, the definition of a
“successful procurement project”, and the funding source for payment of honoraria.
2.0 Purpose
To amend BC No. 2004-5 and reissue the guidelines on the grant of honoraria to
qualified personnel.
3.0 Coverage
This circular shall apply to all national government agencies (NGAs), and its
instrumentalities, including state universities and colleges (SUCs), governmentowned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) and local government units (LGUs).
4.0 Rationale
Honoraria is a form of compensation granted to individuals for the performance of
tasks or involvement in activities beyond their regular functions. Equity calls for equal
compensation for performance of substantially similar duties, with substantially
similar degrees of responsibility. Propriety dictates that only persons who have
successful completed their tasks or participated in accomplished activities ought to
be accomplished.
5.0 Guidelines
5.1 The chairs and members of the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) and the
Technical Working Group (TWG) may be paid honoraria only for successfully
completed procurement projects. In accordance with Section 7 of the
Implementing Rules and Regulations Part A (IRR-A) of RA No. 9184, a
procurement project refers to the entire project identified, described,
detailed, scheduled and budgeted for in the Project Procurement
Management Plan prepared by the agency.
A procurement project shall be considered successfully completed once the
contract has been awarded to the winning bidder.
5.2 The payment of honoraria shall be limited to procurement that involves
competitive bidding. Competitive bidding activities are present only in:
212 Issued on 7 October 2005.
Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Government Personnel
Involved in Government Procurement
Appendix 7
224
• Open and competitive;
• Limited source bidding;
• Negotiated procurement under Section 53 (a) of the IRR, where there has
been failure of bidding for the second time; and
• Negotiated procurement under Section 53 (b) of the IRR following the
procedures under Section 54.2 (b) thereof, whereby the procuring entity
shall draw up a list of at least (3) suppliers or contractors which will be
invited to submit bids.
Conversely, honoraria will not be paid when procurement is thru:
• Direct contracting;
• Repeat order;
• Shopping;
• Negotiated procurement under Section 53 (b) of the IRR following the
procedures under Section 54.2 (d) thereof, whereby the procuring entity
directly negotiates with previous supplier, contractor or consultant, or
when the project is undertaken by administration or thru the AFP, in case
of infrastructure projects; and
• Negotiated procurement under Section 53 (c) to (g) of the IRR.
5.3 The honoraria of each person shall not exceed the rates indicated below per
completed procurement project:
Maximum Honorarium rate per
procurement project
BAC Chair ₱ 3,000.00
BAC Members ₱ 2,500.00
TWG Chair and Members ₱ 2,000.00
5.4 The average amount of honoraria per month over one year shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the basic monthly salary. The honoraria,
however, shall be paid only upon the successful completion of each
procurement.
5.5 To be entitled to honoraria, personnel should be duly assigned as chair or
member of the BAC or the TWG by the head of the department/agency
concerned.
5.6 The members of the BAC Secretariat who are performing the attendant
functions in additions to their regular duties in other non-procurement units
of the agency may likewise be paid honoraria at the same rate as the TWG
Chair and Members, subject to the same regulations.
The members of the BAC Secretariat whose positions are in the Procurement
Unit of the agency shall not be entitled to honoraria. The payment of
overtime services may be allowed, subject to existing policy on the matter.
5.7 Heads of government entities are prohibited from paying honoraria to
personnel involved in procurement activities outside of those covered herein.
Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Government Personnel
Involved in Government Procurement
Appendix 7
225
5.8 By reason of jurisprudence, a Department Undersecretary or Assistant
Secretary who concurrently serves in the BAC, in whatever capacity, shall not
be entitled to honoraria.
5.9 In lieu of honoraria, the payment of overtime services may be allowed for the
administrative staff, such as clerks, messengers and drivers supporting the
BAC, the TWG and the Secretariat, for procurement activities rendered in
excess of official working hours. The payment of overtime services shall be in
accordance with the existing policy on the matter.
5.10 Those who are receiving honoraria for their participation in procurement
activities shall no longer be entitled to overtime pay for procurement-related
services rendered in excess of official working hours.
6.0 Funding Source213
6.1 The amount necessary for the payment of the honoraria and overtime pay
authorized herein shall be sourced only from the following:
 Proceeds from sale of bid documents;
 Fees from contractor/supplier registry;
 Fees charged for copies of minutes of bid openings, BAC resolutions and
other BAC documents;
 Protest fees;
 Liquidated damages; and
 Proceeds from bid/performance security forfeiture.
6.2 Pursuant to the DOF-DBM-COA Permanent Committee Resolution No. 2005-2
dated June 2005, all agencies are authorized to treat the collections from the
sources identified in item 6.1 hereof as trust receipts to be used as
exclusively for the payment of honoraria and overtime pay herein authorized.
Agencies may utilize up to one hundred percent (100%) of the said
collections for the payment of honoraria and overtime pay subject to the
guidelines in item 5.0 of this Circular. Any excess in the amount collected
shall be remitted by NGAs to the Bureau of the Treasury. In the case of
GOCCs and LGUs, the same shall form part of their corporate or local
government funds, respectively.
6.3 The total amount of honoraria and overtime pay to be paid for procurementrelated activities shall not exceed the said collections.
6.4 In cases of deficiency in collections from the sources identified in item 6.1
above, the amount of honoraria and overtime pay shall be adjusted
proportionately for all those entitled thereto.
7.0 Saving Clause
Cases not covered by the provisions of this Circular shall be referred to the Secretary
of Budget and Management for Resolution.
213 Refer to DBM Budget Circular No. 2007-3 for amendments.
Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Government Personnel
Involved in Government Procurement
Appendix 7
226
8.0 Repealing Clause
This Circular supersedes BC No. 2004-5 dated March 23, 2004.
9.0 Effectivity
This Circular shall take effect immediately.
DBM BUDGET CIRCULAR 2007-3
214
1.0 Purpose
1.1 To amend item no. 6.1 of BC 2004-5A which provides the funding source for
payment of honoraria and overtime pay to government personnel involved in
government procurement as authorized under Republic Act No. 9184
(Government Procurement Reform Act), as follows:
 Honoraria – for Chairs and Members of the Bids and Awards Committee
(BAC) and the Technical Working Group (TWG); and,
 Overtime Pay – For administrative staff supporting the BAC and TWG.
1.2 To identify additional funding source for payment of honoraria and overtime
pay to the aforecited personnel; and
1.3 To revise other related provisions of BC No. 2004-5A (i.e., items 6.3 and 6.4)
in order to clarify the manner of payment of said benefits.
2.0 Coverage
This Circular shall apply to all national government agencies (NGAs) including state
universities and colleges (SUCs), government-owned or controlled corporations
(GOCCs) and local government units (LGUs).
3.0 Guidelines
3.1 The amount necessary for payment of honoraria and overtime pay authorized
under BC No. 2004-5A dated October 7, 2005 shall be sourced from the
following:
3.1.1 Collections from successfully completed procurement projects limited,
however, to activities prior to awarding of contracts to winning
bidders:
• Proceeds from sale of bid documents;
• Fees from contractor/supplier registry;
• Fees charged for copies of minutes of bid openings, BAC
resolutions and other BAC documents;
• Protest fees; and,
• Proceeds from bid security forfeiture.
3.1.2 Savings realized from the current year specific budget of the agency
under the General Appropriations Act (GAA).
214 Issued on 29 November 2007.
Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Government Personnel
Involved in Government Procurement
Appendix 7
227
3.1.3 In the case of GOCCs, savings from the DBM-approved corporate
operating budgets.
3.1.4 In the case of LGUs, savings from the local budgets approved by their
respective Sanggunian subject to the pertinent provisions of R.A. 7160
(Local Government Code of 1991).
3.2 Savings refer to portions or balances of agencies’ budgets as referred to in
items 3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 above, free from any obligation of encumbrance
which are:
3.2.1 still available after the completion or final discontinuance or
abandonment of the work, activity or purpose for which the
appropriation is authorized;
3.2.2 arising from unpaid compensation and related costs pertaining to
vacant positions and leaves of absences without pay; and,
3.2.3 realized from the implementation of collective negotiation agreements
which resulted in improved systems and efficiencies and thus enabled
an agency to meet and deliver the required or planned targets,
programs and services at lesser cost.
3.3 In the use of savings, priority shall be given to augmentation of the amounts
set aside for mandatory expenditure items provided under the General
Provisions of the General Appropriations Act (GAA). It is understood that the
use of agency savings for payment of honoraria and overtime pay for
procurement activities shall be made only after satisfying said mandatory
expenditure items.
3.4 The manner of payment of honoraria and overtime pay to entitled
government personnel to be charged against collections from successfully
completed procurement projects (activities prior to awarding of contracts to
winning bidders) enumerated under item 6.1.1 and savings cited under item
6.2 shall be in accordance with item 6.5, except use of savings by national
government agencies which shall follow the General Provision of the GAA on
the disbursement of funds, i.e., through the National Treasury and/or
authorized servicing banks under the Modified Disbursement Scheme.
3.5 In cases of deficiency in collections from procurement activities and nonavailability of agency savings, the amount of honoraria and overtime pay shall
be adjusted proportionately for all those entitled thereto.
4.0 Saving Clause
All other provisions of BC 2004-5A not consistent with this Circular shall remain in
force and effect.
5.0 Effectivity
This Circular shall take effect immediately.
Guidelines on the Sale of Bidding Documents Appendix 8
228
APPENDIX 8
GUIDELINES ON THE SALE OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
As provided in Section 17.4 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of
Republic Act 9184, bidders may be asked to pay for bidding documents to recover
the cost of their preparation and development. The BAC shall issue the bidding
documents to the prospective bidders upon payment of the corresponding cost
thereof to the collecting/disbursing officer of the procuring entity concerned.
2.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to provide standard rates for the sale of bidding
documents to rationalize the fees primarily to regulate its price and to lessen the
exercise of discretion of procuring entities so as not to discourage market
participation and competition.
3.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall apply to the national government, its branches, constitutional
offices, departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state universities and
colleges, government-owned and/or -controlled corporations, government financial
institutions, and local government units.
4.0 GENERAL GUIDELINES
4.1. Procuring entities shall make the bidding documents available on the same
date the advertisement and/or posting of the Invitation to Bid was made
pursuant to Section 17.3 of the IRR of RA 9184.
4.2. As required in Section 21.1(g)215 of the IRR of RA 9184, the price of the
bidding documents must be included in the Invitation to Bid/Request for
Expression of Interest in order to inform all prospective bidders of the cost of
its acquisition.
4.3. The BAC shall issue the bidding documents to any prospective bidder upon
payment of the standard rate of the bidding documents.
4.4. The standard rate for the sale of bidding documents shall be based on the
fixed rate on a fixed range approach and shall be applicable in the
procurement of goods, consulting services, and the contracting for
infrastructure projects by the procuring entity, whether procured by way of
public bidding or any of the alternative methods of procurement that utilize
processes and procedures in competitive bidding.
4.5. Procuring entities are proscribed to adopt any internal rule or practice that
establish fees that are inconsistent or beyond the standard rate for the sale of
bidding documents set forth in these guidelines.
215 As amended by the 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
Guidelines on the Sale of Bidding Documents Appendix 8
229
4.6. The proceeds from the sale of the bidding documents shall continue to be
used for the payment of honoraria as provided for in Budget Circular No.
2004-5A, dated 7 October 2005, or to augment the funds for the procuring
entity’s legal assistance and indemnification package as provided in the
Guidelines for Legal Assistance and Indemnification of Bids and Awards
Committee Members and its Support Staff.
5.0 STANDARD RATES
The cost of bidding documents shall correspond to the ABC range as indicated in the
table below. This shall be the maximum amount of fee that procuring entities can set
for the acquisition of bidding documents.
Approved Budget for the Contract
Maximum Cost of Bidding
Documents
(in Philippine Peso)
500,000 and below 500.00
More than 500,000 up to 1 Million 1,000.00
More than 1 Million up to 5 Million 5,000.00
More than 5 Million up to 10 Million 10,000.00
More than 10 Million up to 50 Million 25,000.00
More than 50 Million up to 500 Million 50,000.00
More than 500 Million 75,000.00
6.0 REPEALING CLAUSE
Any other guidelines, administrative order, office order, rule or regulation and/or
parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of these Guidelines is
hereby repealed, modified, or amended accordingly.
7.0 EFFECTIVITY
These guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the
University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of these
guidelines.216
216 Issued through GPPB Resolution 04-2012, dated 24 February 2012, published in The Daily Tribune on 20 August 2012.
Guidelines in the Determination of Eligibility of Foreign
Suppliers, Contractors, and Consultants to Participate in
Government Procurement Projects
Appendix 9
230
APPENDIX 9
GUIDELINES IN THE DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBLITY OF FOREIGN SUPPLIERS,
CONTRACTORS, AND CONSULTANTS TO PARTICIPATE IN GOVERNMENT
PROCUREMENT PROJECTS
1.0 GENERAL POLICY
In line with the economic policies enunciated in the Constitution, particularly on the
promotion of Filipino labor, domestic materials, and locally produced goods, Republic
Act No. 9184, in consonance with Republic Act No. 5183, adopts as general principle
the preference for Filipino nationals in the award of Government’s procurement
contracts.
However, in light of the principles of economic exchange and expansion of trade and
exports with other countries on the basis of equality and reciprocity, with due regard
to the government’s initiatives in the prohibition and/or regulation of monopolies and
other situations that restrain trade and fair competition, qualified foreign nationals
may be eligible to participate in the public procurement of goods, infrastructure
projects and consultancy services; provided, however, that provisions on domestic
preference, Most-Favored Nation (MFN) status and non-discrimination treatments
under applicable laws and treaties are complied with.
2.0 SCOPE, APPLICATION AND PURPOSE
These guidelines shall govern procurement of goods, infrastructure projects, and
consulting services by all Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National
Government, Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations, Government
Financing Institutions, State Universities and Colleges, and Local Government Units
and are formulated to clarify procurement policy on the eligibility of foreign bidders
to participate in domestically-funded public procurement opportunities, within the
framework of national and international economic and trade policies.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
For purposes of these guidelines, the following terms or words and phrases
shall be defined as follows:
3.1. Competent Authority refers to an authority designated by a Contracting Party
that is competent to issue an apostille. A State may designate one or more
Competent Authorities and may designate Competent Authorities that are
competent to issue an apostille for certain categories of public documents.
Information about designated Competent Authorities may be found on the
Apostille Section of the Hague Conference217 website under “Competent
Authorities.” 218
(n)
217 Apostille Handbook, A Handbook on the Practical Operation of the Apostille Convention, p. xviii. The Netherlands: The
HagueConference on Private International Permanent Bureau.
218 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 13-2019, dated 23 May 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
Guidelines in the Determination of Eligibility of Foreign
Suppliers, Contractors, and Consultants to Participate in
Government Procurement Projects
Appendix 9
231
3.2. Contracting Party refers to a State that has joined the Apostille Convention,219
whether or not the Convention has entered into force for that State.220
(n)
3.3. Foreign Consultant refers to an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation or joint venture other than those provided under Section 24.3.1
of the IRR 221 of R.A. 9184.
3.4. Foreign Contractor refers to a citizen of a foreign country or an entity
where Filipino ownership or interest is less than seventy five percent (75%)
offering infrastructure related services other than consulting services.
3.5. Foreign Supplier refers to a citizen of a foreign country or an entity where
Filipino ownership or interest is less than sixty percent (60%) who is engaged
in the manufacture or sale of the merchandise or performance of the general
services covered by his bid.
3.6. Local Consultant refers to an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation or joint venture as provided in Section 24.3.1 of the IRR 222 of
R.A. 9184 and complying with the relevant requirements therein.
3.7. Local Contractor refers to a Filipino citizen or sole proprietorship; or
partnership duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and of which at
least seventy-five percent (75%) of the interest belongs to the citizens of the
Philippines; or a corporation duly organized under the laws of the Philippines,
and of which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the outstanding capital
stock belongs to citizens of the Philippines, duly licensed under Philippine
laws to undertake infrastructure activities in the Philippines.
3.8. Local Supplier refers to any citizen of the Philippines, or any corporate body
or commercial company duly organized and registered under the laws of the
Philippines where Filipino ownership or interest is at least sixty percent
(60%), habitually established in business and engaged in the manufacture or
sale of the merchandise or performance of the general services covered by
his bid.
4.0 FOREIGN SUPPLIERS, CONTRACTORS, AND CONSULTANTS ELIGIBLE TO
PARTICIPATE
4.1. In the procurement of goods, regardless of the procurement method used,
foreign bidders may be eligible to participate under any of the following
circumstances:
4.1.1. When the goods sought to be procured are not available from local
suppliers, subject to Item 5 herein; or
4.1.2. When there is a need to prevent situations that defeat competition or
restrain trade, subject to Item 6 herein; or
219 Apostille Handbook, A Handbook on the Practical Operation of the Apostille Convention, p. xviii. The Netherlands: The
HagueConference on Private International Permanent Bureau.
220 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 13-2019, dated 23 May 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
221 As amended by GPPB Resolution 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
222 Ibid.
Guidelines in the Determination of Eligibility of Foreign
Suppliers, Contractors, and Consultants to Participate in
Government Procurement Projects
Appendix 9
232
4.1.3. When the foreign supplier, manufacturer and/or distributor is a
citizen, corporation or association of a country the laws or regulations
of which grant reciprocal rights or privileges to citizens, corporations
or associations of the Philippines, irrespective of the availability of
goods from local suppliers, subject to Item 7 herein223; or,
4.1.4. When provided for under any treaty or international or executive
agreement.
4.2. In the procurement of infrastructure projects, foreign contractors may be
eligible to participate in the bidding when provided for under any treaty or
international or executive agreement as provided under Section 23.4.2.2224 of
the IRR of R.A. 9184 or if they form a joint venture with local contractors;
provided that their interest in or ownership of the joint venture shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%). However, where the structures to be built
require the application of techniques and/or technologies which are not
adequately possessed by a person/entity which meets the seventy-five
percent (75%) under Section 23.4.2.1225 of the IRR of R.A. 9184, they may
be eligible to participate in the bidding.226
4.3. In the procurement of consulting services, foreign consultants may be hired if
local consultants do not have the sufficient expertise, capability, and capacity
to render the services required under the project, as determined by the head
of the procuring entity, in accordance with Section 24.3.3 of the IRR of R.A.
9184.227
5.0 GOODS ARE NOT AVAILABLE FROM LOCAL SUPPLIERS
5.1. In the procurement of goods not available from Local Suppliers, the procuring
entity may invite foreign suppliers, manufacturers and/or distributors to
participate in the procurement process.
5.2. For purposes of these guidelines, goods are not available from Local Suppliers
when, at any time before advertisement for their procurement, it is
determined that no Local Supplier is capable to supply the required goods to
the Government, in which case, foreign suppliers, manufacturers and/or
distributors may be invited to participate in the bidding. Therefore, the head
of the procuring entity or his duly authorized representative shall certify that,
after diligent market research conducted by the procuring entity, the goods
sought to be procured are not available from Local Suppliers. In addition,
when applicable, the procuring entity shall secure a certification from the
appropriate Government regulatory body, such as, but not limited to, the
Bureau of Product Standards of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)
for electrical products, mechanical/building & construction materials,
chemicals, foods and other consumer products, and the Bureau of Food and
Drugs of the Department of Health (DOH) for drugs, medicine, and other
223 As amended by GPPB Resolution 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
224 As amended by the 2016
Revised IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
225 Ibid.
226 As amended by GPPB Resolution 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
227 Ibid.
Guidelines in the Determination of Eligibility of Foreign
Suppliers, Contractors, and Consultants to Participate in
Government Procurement Projects
Appendix 9
233
related medical devices, that based on its available records, the goods sought
to be procured are not available from Local Suppliers.
5.3. If despite the availability of the goods sought to be procured, no local
supplier is interested to participate in the procurement process, the head of
the procuring entity shall certify that it has advertised the same for public
bidding and shall make a statement that no local supplier participated in the
bidding and that the same is due to reasons not attributable to the procuring
entity.
5.4. In the case mentioned in Item 5.3, for purposes of inviting foreign suppliers,
the bidding requirements and conditions, as advertised, shall not be modified
or changed. Otherwise, modifications and/or changes in the requirements
and conditions of the bidding shall disallow the procuring entity to resort to
invitation of foreign bidders.
5.5. The procurement of unavailable goods must be through competitive or public
bidding unless conditions prescribed under R.A. 9184 and its IRR228 warrant
resort to alternative methods of procurement.
6.0 THERE IS NEED TO PREVENT SITUATIONS THAT DEFEAT COMPETITION OR
RESTRAIN TRADE
6.1. In cases where the procuring entity intends to procure goods from an
exclusive local manufacturer, supplier, distributor, or dealer through direct
contracting under Section 50 (c) of the IRR,229 when said method is
recommended by the BAC and approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity,
and reflected in the approved Annual Procurement Plan, it shall, before
commencing any negotiations with a local supplier, post through the website
of the procuring entity, if any, and in the Philippine Government Electronic
Procurement System (PhilGEPS), an invitation to foreign manufacturers to
submit a manifestation of its intention to participate. Should any foreign
manufacturer submit such manifestation within the period prescribed in the
invitation, the procuring entity shall commence the conduct of public bidding.
If no foreign manufacturer submits such manifestation within the said period,
the procuring entity may proceed with the intended procurement through
direct contracting with the said exclusive local manufacturer, supplier,
distributor, or dealer.
7.0 RECIPROCITY RULE IN THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS
7.1. In the procurement of goods, a supplier, manufacturer and/or distributor who
is a citizen, corporation or association of a country whose laws or regulations
grant reciprocal rights or privileges allowing Filipino nationals to participate in
public procurement in their country, are allowed to participate in government
procurement projects.
7.2. The bidder claiming eligibility by reason of their country’s extension of
reciprocal rights to Filipinos shall submit a certification from the relevant
228 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
229 Ibid.
Guidelines in the Determination of Eligibility of Foreign
Suppliers, Contractors, and Consultants to Participate in
Government Procurement Projects
Appendix 9
234
government office of their country stating that Filipinos are allowed to
participate in their government procurement for the same item/product.230
7.3. The said certification231 shall be validated during post-qualification of bidders.
8.0 VALIDATION OF THE APOSTILLE
For Contracting Parties to the Apostille Convention, the documents shall be
authenticated through an apostille by the Competent Authority, as defined in 3.1,
except for countries232 identified by the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), will still
require legalization (red ribbon) by the relevant Embassy or Consulate. Please refer
to the DFA website for any updates. (n)
The TWG shall verify or validate the apostille through the Competent Authority's eregister or by phone or electronic mail. The Contact information for the Competent
Authorities is available using the link below:
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/authorities1/?cid=41.
233
(n)
9.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines or any amendments hereto shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation
and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified
copies of these guidelines.234
230 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 34-2014, dated 16 December 2014, published in the Manila Times on 15 May 2015.
231 Ibid.
232 As of May 14, 2019: Austria, Finland, Germany and Greece.
233 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 13-2019, dated 23 May 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
234 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 018-2005, dated 12 September 2005, and published in the Official Gazette on 27
March2006.
Guidelines on the Use of Bid Securing Declaration Appendix 10
235
APPENDIX 10
GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF BID SECURING DECLARATION
1.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These Guidelines shall govern the use of Bid Securing Declaration as an additional
form of bid security under the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic
Act No. 9184, otherwise known as “The Government Procurement Reform Act”.
These guidelines shall apply to all branches, constitutional commissions and offices,
agencies, departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the Government,
including government-owned and/or -controlled corporations (“GOCCs”), government
financial institutions (“GFIs”), state universities and colleges (“SUCs”), and local
government units (“LGUs”).
2.0 GUIDING PRINCIPLES
In order to enhance competition and bidders’ participation, reduce transactional
costs, and promote economy in procurement activities of the government, the use of
a Bid Securing Declaration shall be an alternative to the existing forms of bid security
under the IRR.
The bidder shall have the option to use a Bid Securing Declaration or any other bid
security in the form and amount enumerated under Section 27.2 of the IRR.
3.0 DEFINITION
3.1. Bid Securing Declaration is an undertaking by a prospective bidder, committing
to pay the corresponding fine and be suspended for a period of time from
being qualified to participate in any government procurement activity in the
event it violates any of the conditions stated therein.
3.2. The Bid Securing Declaration shall comply with the standard format attached
hereto as Annex “A” and shall be submitted to the procuring entity in the
manner prescribed under Sections 25 and 27 of the IRR.
4.0 PERIOD OF EFFECTIVITY
4.1. The Bid Securing Declaration shall be valid for a reasonable period determined
by the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned and indicated in the bidding
documents, which in no case shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) calendar
days from the date of the opening of bids, unless duly extended by the bidder
upon the request of the Head of the Procuring Entity.
4.2. The Bid Securing Declaration shall automatically expire in the following
instances:
a) Upon expiration of the bid validity period, or any extension thereof
pursuant to Section 28.2 of the IRR;
Guidelines on the Use of Bid Securing Declaration Appendix 10
236
b) When all bidders are declared ineligible or post-disqualified and, upon
receipt of the notice therefor, either failed to timely file a request for
reconsideration or filed a waiver to avail of said right;
c) When the bidder declared as the Lowest Calculated and Responsive
Bidder/Highest Rated and Responsive Bidder, has furnished the
performance security and signed the contract.
5.0 GROUNDS FOR ENFORCEMENT OF BID SECURING DECLARATION
The Bid Securing Declaration shall be enforced when the bidder commits any act
resulting to the forfeiture of bid security under Sections 23.1(b), 34.2, 40.1 and 69.1,
except 69.1(f), of the IRR of RA 9184.235
6.0 PENALTIES
Commission of any of the acts mentioned in Section 5 of these Guidelines shall merit
the following sanctions:
a) Penalty of automatic disqualification for two (2) years from bidding for any
procurement contract with any Procuring Entity, upon receipt of the Blacklisting
Order;236
b) Payment of fine equivalent to the amount subject to the following rules:
(i) In case of multiple bidders:
Two percent (2%) of the Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) or the
difference between the evaluated bid prices of the bidder with the Lowest
Calculated/Highest Rated Bid and the bidder with the next Lowest
Calculated/Highest Rated Bid, and so on, whichever is higher.237
As regards, the bidder with the Lowest Calculated/Highest Rated Bid, the
amount shall be two percent (2%) of the ABC or the difference between
the evaluated bid price and the ABC, whichever is higher.238
(ii) In case of a single bidder:
Two percent (2%) of the ABC or the difference between the evaluated bid
price and the ABC, whichever is higher.239
(iii) Violations committed prior to opening of financial envelope:240
A fix amount equivalent to two percent (2%) of the ABC.241
235 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 15-2014, dated 20 June 2014, and published in the Manila Times on 27 November
2017. 236 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 16-2020, dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26
September 2020.
237 Ibid.
238 Ibid.
239 Ibid.
240 Ibid.
241 Ibid.
Guidelines on the Use of Bid Securing Declaration Appendix 10
237
(iv) The bidder shall pay the above-mentioned fine within fifteen (15) days
from receipt of the written demand by the procuring entity as a result of
the violation of the conditions in the Bid Securing Declaration.242
(v) The imposition of the foregoing fine is without prejudice to other legal
action the government may undertake against the erring bidder.243
7.0 BLACKLISTING PROCEDURE
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of
Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors and Consultants, the following
provisions shall govern the blacklisting for purposes of this Guidelines:
7.1. The procuring entity shall immediately issue the blacklisting order upon
determination of the grounds for enforcement of the Bid Securing Declaration
provided in Section 5 hereof.
7.2. Only in cases where the notice of award is not in conformity with the Bidding
Documents may the blacklisted bidder file a motion for reconsideration with the
Head of the Procuring Entity within three (3) calendar days from receipt of the
blacklisting order.
7.3. The blacklisted bidder shall only be delisted upon the expiration of the period of
penalty and payment of the fine.
8.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect immediately after publication in the Official Gazette
or a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the University
of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of these guidelines.244
242 Ibid.
243 Ibid.
244 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 03-2012, dated 27 January 2012, published in The Daily Tribune on 20 August 2012.
Tie-Breaking Method Appendix 11
238
APPENDIX 11
GPPB CIRCULAR 06-2005
TIE-BREAKING METHOD
1.0 Purpose
This Circular245 is issued to advise government agencies on how to resolve cases
where an occurrence of a tie among bidders takes place, i.e., two or more of the
bidders are determined and declared as the Lowest Calculated and Responsive
Bidder (LCRB), for the procurement of goods and infrastructure projects, or the
Highest Rated and Responsive Bidder (HRRB) for the procurement of consulting
services.
2.0 Coverage
All Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government,
Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), State Universities and
Colleges (SUCs), and Local Government Units (LGUs).
3.0 Rules and Regulations
3.1 In accordance with the considerations advanced/maintained in Policy Matter
No. 02-2005, issued by the Government Procurement Policy Board, procuring
entities are hereby given guidance on how to resolve cases involving a tie,
after post-qualification, among bidders determined and declared as LCRB or
HRRB.
3.2 Procuring entities are hereby required to identify at the onset of the bidding
process, and thereafter include in the bidding documents as instruction or a
matter of information to prospective bidders, a ready and clear measure to be
used in the event two or more of the bidders have been post-qualified as
LCRB or HRRB. In all cases, the measure determined by the procuring entity
shall be non-discretionary and non-discriminatory such that the same is based
on sheer luck or chance. The procuring entity may use “draw lots” or similar
methods of chance.
3.3 However, in lieu of the pre-determined criteria set and declared in the bidding
documents, the procuring entity may opt to bring the concerned bidders to
agree on a better selection criteria which should also be nondiscretionary/non-discriminatory and is similarly based on sheer luck or
chance.
4.0 For compliance.
245 Issued on 05 August 2005.
Guidelines on Pre-Selection Procedure in the Conduct of
Limited Source Bidding
Appendix 12
239
APPENDIX 12
GUIDELINES AMENDING THE PRE-SELECTION PROCEDURE IN THE CONDUCT OF
LIMITED SOURCE BIDDING UNDER GPPB RESOLUTION 05-2011
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
In order to promote efficiency and economy, Limited Source Bidding, as an
alternative method of procurement, may be resorted to by the procuring entity only
in highly exceptional and justifiable cases as provided for in RA 9184 and its IRR, and
subject to the prior approval of the Head of Procuring Entity. In doing so, the
procuring entity shall ensure that the most advantageous price for the Government is
obtained.246
2.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to provide the procedure for the pre-selection of
suppliers or consultants in the use of Limited Source Bidding as an alternative
method of procurement of goods and consulting services pursuant to Section 49 of
R.A. 9184 and its IRR.
3.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
3.1 These guidelines shall apply to national government, its branches,
constitutional offices, departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including
state universities and colleges, government-owned and/or -controlled
corporations, government financial institutions, and local government units
when resorting to Limited Source Bidding in the procurement of goods and
consulting services.
3.2 Limited Source Bidding, otherwise known as selective bidding, is an
alternative method of procurement which may be employed under any of the
following conditions:
a) Procurement of highly specialized types of goods (e.g., sophisticated
defense equipment, complex air navigation systems, coal) and
consulting services where only a few suppliers or consultants are known
to be available, such that resorting to the public bidding method will not
likely result in any additional suppliers or consultants participating in the
bidding; or
b) Procurement of major plant components where it is deemed
advantageous to limit the bidding to known qualified bidders in order to
maintain uniform quality and performance of the plant as a whole.247
4.0 GUIDELINES
4.1. Upon determination that a procurement activity may be done through Limited
Source Bidding, the procuring entity, through the Bids and Awards Committee
246 Section 48 of the revised IRR, R.A. No. 9184.
247 Section 49.1 of the revised IRR, R.A. No. 9184.
Guidelines on Pre-Selection Procedure in the Conduct of
Limited Source Bidding
Appendix 12
240
(BAC), shall prepare a list of pre-selected suppliers or consultants which shall
be those appearing in a list that is maintained updated by the relevant
government authority with expertise in the type of procurement concerned.
4.2 In the event that there is a relevant government authority, but no list exists,
the procuring entity shall request the identified relevant government authority
for the issuance of the list. The relevant government authority concerned
shall not unduly and unreasonably delay the issuance of such list. In case of
non-issuance by the relevant government authority of the list, the procuring
entity shall resort to open competitive bidding in its selection of supplier or
consultant.
4.3 In the event that no relevant government authority exists, and/or the
procuring entity represents that it is the relevant government authority, it
may prepare a self-generated list of suppliers or consultants, with known
experience and proven capability on the requirements of the particular
contract; Provided, that it establishes, attests to such fact, and confirms that
it has the expertise on the subject matter of procurement by virtue of its
mandate and nature of its functions and operations; Provided, further, that in
the event that the procuring entity cannot establish its expertise on the
subject matter of procurement within the purview of Section 49.2 of the IRR,
the procuring entity shall resort to open competitive bidding in its selection of
supplier or consultant.
4.4 In preparing the pre-selected list, the BAC, possibly with the assistance of the
Technical Working Group (TWG), shall adopt a set of criteria to be used as
basis in evaluating the capability of the entities. Said criteria shall take into
consideration the following characteristics of the supplier/consultant:
a) Capability and resources to perform the contract taking into account
their experience and past performance on similar contracts;
b) Capabilities with respect to personnel, equipment, or manufacturing
facilities; and
c) Financial position.
In the conduct of the pre-selection proceedings, procuring entities shall
ensure that the list or source of known eligible bidders is accurate, definite,
and distinct, and resorting to public bidding will not likely result in any
additional suppliers or consultants participating in the bidding.
4.5 The BAC shall evaluate and submit the recommended pre-selected list to the
head of the procuring entity (HOPE) for approval. The pre-selected list shall
include (i) the technical specifications/terms of reference of the project, and
(ii) the specific criteria used by the procuring entity for the evaluation of the
preselected suppliers or consultants.
4.6 Upon approval, the HOPE shall transmit the pre-selected list to the GPPB in
compliance with Section 49.2 of the IRR of RA 9184. The list must be
accompanied with a certification from the HOPE: (i) justifying the recourse to
Guidelines on Pre-Selection Procedure in the Conduct of
Limited Source Bidding
Appendix 12
241
Limited Source Bidding, (ii) verifying the compliance with the criteria
previously set; and (iii) certifying that the pre-selected list is a list of known
suppliers or consultants where resort to public bidding will not likely result in
any additional suppliers or consultants participating in the bidding.
In case the procuring entity identifies itself as the relevant government
authority with the expertise on the particular type of procurement concerned,
the HOPE shall also submit a certification attesting to the fact that the
procuring entity has expertise on the subject matter of procurement by virtue
of its mandate and nature of its functions and operations.
4.7 The GPPB-TSO shall acknowledge receipt of the pre-selected list and shall
post the list in the GPPB or PhilGEPS website for the purpose of transparency.
4.7.1 The function of the GPPB-TSO shall partake of a ministerial nature
and shall not include the validation of the qualifications of the
suppliers or consultants contained in the list.
4.7.2 Concerns on the propriety of the self-generated or pre-selected list
shall be directed to the procuring entity that issued/adopted the list
for a particular procurement activity in accordance with the protest
mechanism provided under Section 55 of the IRR of RA 9184.
4.8 Pursuant to Section 49.4, the procuring entity shall post the procurement
opportunity to be undertaken through Limited Source Bidding in the PhilGEPS
website, website of the procuring entity concerned, if available, and at any
conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the procuring
entity concerned for seven (7) calendar days, upon receipt of said
acknowledgment letter.
Except for the advertisement requirement provided under Section 21.2.1
(c)248 of the IRR of RA 9184 in the use of Limited Source Bidding as an
alternative procurement modality, the procuring entity shall adopt the rules
on competitive bidding as prescribed in RA 9184 and its IRR.
6.0 REPEALING CLAUSE
Any other guidelines, administrative order, office order, rule or regulation and/or
parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of these Guidelines are
hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.
7.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the
University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of these
guidelines.249
248 As amended by the 2016 Revised IRR, R.A. No. 9184.
249 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 06-2012, dated 30 March 2012, published in The Daily Tribune on 20 August 2012.
Guidelines on Implementation of Infrastructure Projects
Undertaken by the AFP Corps of Engineers
Appendix 13
242
APPENDIX 13
GUIDELINES ON IMPLEMENTATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
UNDERTAKEN BY THE AFP CORPS OF ENGINEERS
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
The Armed Forces of the Philippines Corps of Engineers (AFPCOE), being an integral
part of the Government, has the capability to undertake infrastructure projects. As
such, it is the policy of the Government to engage the services of the AFPCOE in
directly implementing projects as provided in these guidelines.
2.0 PURPOSE AND COVERAGE
These guidelines shall streamline and provide rules governing the implementation of
infrastructure projects undertaken by the AFPCOE.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1 End-User Agency – The agency that is the beneficiary of the project or
source of funds of the project to be implemented by the AFPCOE.
3.2 Implementing Unit – The AFPCOE unit tasked to undertake the project as
covered by a Construction Directive issued by the AFP Chief of Engineers or the
Chief Engineers of the major services, namely: Army, Navy, and Air Force.
3.3 Job Order – The hiring of laborers for piece work or intermittent job of short
duration not exceeding six (6) months and pay is on a daily or hourly basis.
The Implementing Unit may recruit workers from the locality and directly hire
them to provide the required labor for the project being undertaken, subject to
applicable laws, rules and regulations. The Implementing Unit prepares a
payroll that serves as the basis for the payment of wages to the workers.
3.4 “Pakyaw” system – The system of hiring laborers where the Implementing
Unit invites, through appropriate procurement procedures, “pakyaw” groups to
submit price quotations for the labor component required for a specified piece
of work. The “pakyaw” groups shall comprise a group of laborers residing
within the vicinity of the project site, and shall not be a regular licensed
contractor.
3.5 Projects Undertaken by Administration - An infrastructure project is said
to be undertaken by administration, from the point of view of the AFPCOE, if
the Implementing Unit undertakes the project using its organic personnel
through force account and/or “pakyaw” system, equipment and tools, as well
as procures the construction supplies and materials necessary for project
completion, and manages the project implementation.
4.0 TYPES OF PROJECTS THAT MAY BE UNDERTAKEN BY ADMINISTRATION
The following types of projects may be undertaken by administration by the AFPCOE:
Guidelines on Implementation of Infrastructure Projects
Undertaken by the AFP Corps of Engineers
Appendix 13
243
4.1. DND-AFP infrastructure projects – Projects involving the construction,
maintenance, and repair of facilities and utilities of the Department of National
Defense (DND), Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), and other DND bureaus
and agencies. These include infrastructure projects funded out of the DND
appropriations and the proceeds of the disposition of military camps/stations
under Republic Act 7227 which are intended for the replication of AFP facilities
affected by such disposition.
4.2. End-User Agency infrastructure projects in high security risk areas – Projects
funded by other government agencies and covered by a Memorandum of
Agreement between them and the DND-AFP, to be implemented by the
AFPCOE through funds transferred from the end-user agency to the DND-AFP.
These include, but are not limited to, the construction and rehabilitation of
roads, bridges, school buildings, housing and resettlement sites, irrigation and
electrification projects and other vital facilities and utilities. However, these
projects may only be undertaken by the AFPCOE in areas which are considered
as high security risk areas or in areas with potential conflict or peace and order
problem, as determined by the authorized officials of the DND/AFP.
4.3. Special projects - Projects categorized as listed below. The project funds shall
be transferred to the DND/AFP prior to the implementation of the project
subject to existing laws and regulations, and guidelines that shall be formulated
by the Secretary of National Defense (SND).
4.3.1. Projects directed by the President - Projects specifically directed by
the President to be undertaken by the AFPCOE for the promotion of
peace and order, national development, security and stability, as
specified and determined by the President.
4.3.2. Projects related to Civil Defense / Disaster Relief - Projects specifically
directed by the SND as Chairman of the National Disaster
Coordinating Council, in support of disaster relief and rehabilitation
operations.
5.0 REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
5.1 All projects undertaken by administration should be included in the Annual
Procurement Plan (APP) of the end-user, unless the same is related to Civil
Defense/Disaster Relief, or is an unforeseen contingency. Moreover, the
AFPCOE shall only be required to prepare the Project Procurement
Management Plan (PPMP) and corresponding APP for projects funded out of
DND-AFP appropriations, BCDA funds, and trust receipts managed by the
AFP. For projects funded out of appropriations of other agencies, it is
sufficient that the project is included in the approved APP of the end-user or
source agency. In all cases, there must be an approved program of work for
the project.
5.2 End-User Agency may only request AFPCOE to implement projects and
transfer funds to it if the End-User Agency has no proficiency to conduct the
procurement, or no technical capability to undertake the project on its own,
and only if the project is located in a high security risk area or in areas with
Guidelines on Implementation of Infrastructure Projects
Undertaken by the AFP Corps of Engineers
Appendix 13
244
potential conflict or peace and order problem, as determined by the
authorized officials of the DND/AFP, except for projects under Section 4.3.1
hereof.
5.3 The SND or his duly authorized representative shall approve projects
undertaken by administration, in accordance with the provisions of Section
23.4250 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)251 of Republic Act
9184 (R.A. 9184). If the end-user is another government entity, the Chief of
Engineers of the AFP or the Engineering Brigade Commander concerned and
the Head of the End-User Agency or his duly authorized representative shall
enter into a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), subject to the approval of
the AFP Chief-of-Staff and the SND or his duly authorized representative.
6.0 FUNDS MANAGEMENT
6.1 The approved MOA or the Memorandum shall be the basis for the transfer of
funds from the End-User Agency to the GHQ-AFP. The funds shall be taken up
in the Trust Account for Inter-Agency Transferred Funds for Infrastructure,
which will be set up in the books of accounts of the GHQ-AFP. The GHQ-AFP
shall release the funds and corresponding Cash Cover to the Implementing Unit
subject to the conditions herein specified.
6.2 Liquidation for funds transferred shall be the responsibility of the Implementing
Unit, subject to existing COA rules and regulations.
7.0 ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING (A&E) AND ADMINISTRATION AND
SUPERVISION (A&S) EXPENSES
The budget for the project may include a provision for Architectural and Engineering
(A&E), as well as Administration and Supervision (A&S) expenses, as necessary.
A&E expenses shall be used to support the preparation of plans, specifications,
estimates and other documents related to and necessary for the commencement of
the project. A&S expenses, on the other hand, shall be used to support the project
management requirements of the unit, including, but not limited to, material testing
and quality control, travel for project inspection, and overhead expenses. The SND
shall issue guidelines to determine the appropriate amount of A&E as well as A&S
expenses. For projects funded by other agencies, however, A&E expenses shall not
exceed three percent (3%) of the project cost, and A&S expenses shall not exceed
three percent (3%) of the project cost, to be supported by the approved program of
work in the MOA.
8.0 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT, SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS, AND
SERVICES FOR THE PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN BY AFPCOE
8.1 Subject to the agreement of the DND-AFP and the End-User Agency, either the
DND BAC or AFP BAC, or End-User Agency BAC shall handle all procurement of
equipment, labor, supplies, materials, consultancy services and other
requirements of the AFPCOE in the implementation of its mandate. In case the
End-User Agency is responsible for the procurement of construction supplies
250 As amended by the 2016 Revised IRR, R.A. No. 9184.
251 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines on Implementation of Infrastructure Projects
Undertaken by the AFP Corps of Engineers
Appendix 13
245
and materials, the Implementing Unit shall be responsible only for hiring of
labor, provision of equipment, and project management.
8.2 In the acquisition of goods, supplies and services, including construction
materials and equipment, the AFPCOE shall abide with the provisions of R.A.
9184 and its IRR.252
8.3 The Implementing Unit may hire additional labor to augment their organic
personnel, if necessary; Provided, however, that the civilian labor component
for the project shall not be more than sixty percent (60%), and, as far as
practicable, shall be sourced from the project locality. The AFPCOE shall
ensure that unskilled laborers hired are paid the minimum wage applicable to
the area, and that semi-skilled and skilled workers are paid wages not
exceeding the prevailing market rates in the area. In hiring the laborers and
workers, the Implementing Unit may adopt either the direct hiring system or
the “pakyaw” system. In the case of “pakyaw” system, Section 3 of the GPPB
Guidelines for the Implementation of Projects Undertaken “By Administration”
or Force Account shall be followed.
8.4 The Implementing Unit may likewise lease supplemental equipment and tools
as may be needed, chargeable against project funds, in accordance with
existing laws, rules and regulations on the lease of equipment. Furthermore,
the same should be provided for in the approved program of work. The
AFPCOE may also enter into lease contracts with option to purchase, if
warranted.
9.0 AUTHORITY TO CHARGE FEES FOR RENTAL OF EQUIPMENT
In order to ensure the operational readiness and maintenance of the construction
equipment of the AFPCOE, the AFP shall be authorized to charge up to one hundred
percent (100%) of the authorized current Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWH) equipment rental rate for the utilization of AFP equipment in the
implementation of projects, to cover the cost of equipment utilization in the project,
including depreciation, operation, repair and maintenance. The rental fees collected
shall be deposited in the National Treasury as mandated by Executive Order 338,
dated 17 May 1996, and shall be disbursed in accordance with the provisions of COADBM-DOF Joint Circular No. 1-97 dated 02 January 1997.
10.0 EFFECTIVITY
10.1 These Guidelines or any amendments thereto shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general
circulation and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of
three (3) certified copies of these guidelines. 253
252 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
253 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 09-2005, dated 28 April 2005, published in the Official Gazette on 13 June 2005.
Guidelines on NGO Participation in Public Procurement Appendix 14
246
APPENDIX 14
GUIDELINES ON NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION PARTICIPATION IN
PUBLIC PROCUREMENT
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
Section 23, Article II of the Philippine Constitution prescribes that the State shall
encourage the participation of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), communitybased, or sectoral organizations in the promotion of the welfare of the nation.
As a general rule, all procurement shall be done through competitive public bidding.
However, when an appropriation law earmarks an amount for projects to be
specifically contracted out to NGOs, it is the intent of Congress to give due
preference to NGOs.
2.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines prescribe the allowable modes of selecting an NGO in case an
appropriation law or ordinance specifically earmarks an amount for projects to be
specifically contracted out to NGOs.
These guidelines shall apply to national government, its branches, constitutional
offices, departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state universities and
colleges, government-owned and/or controlled corporations, government financial
institutions, and local government units.
3.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to meet the following objectives:
3.1 If the procuring entity decides to conduct public bidding, to prescribe the
rules and procedures that shall govern public bidding limited to NGOs; and
3.2 If the procuring entity decides to enter into negotiated procurement under
Section 53.11 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)254 of Republic
Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184), to provide the necessary steps and procedures in
the selection of the NGO.
4.0 GENERAL GUIDELINES
4.1 When an appropriation law or ordinance specifically earmarks an amount for
projects to be specifically contracted out to NGOs, the procuring entity may
select an NGO through competitive public bidding or negotiated procurement
under Section 53.11 of the IRR.255
4.2 Non-Governmental Organization or NGO refers to a non-stock, non-profit
domestic corporation duly registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) or a cooperative duly registered with the Cooperative
Development Authority (CDA) committed to the task of socio-economic
254 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
255 Ibid.
Guidelines on NGO Participation in Public Procurement Appendix 14
247
development and established primarily for providing goods and services to
the public.
4.3 The selected NGO shall keep and maintain separate savings account and
accounting records in accordance with generally accepted accounting rules
and principles, subject to visitorial audit and examination by the procuring
entity or the Commission on Audit.
4.4 Unless otherwise provided by law, technical specifications prescribed for the
School Building Program under the Department of Education shall be the
same as those prescribed by the Department of Public Works and Highways.
4.5 For the erasure of doubt, the NGO, whether selected through public bidding
or negotiated procurement, shall be required to post a performance security
in accordance with Section 39 of the IRR of R.A. 9184 and a warranty in
accordance with Section 62 of the IRR of R.A. 9184.
5.0 PUBLIC BIDDING LIMITED TO NGOs
5.1 If the procuring entity decides to select the NGO through competitive public
bidding, it shall advertise and post Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of
Interest in accordance with Section 21.2.1 of the IRR.256
5.2 In addition to the information enumerated under Section 21.1 of the IRR, the
Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest257 shall also include (i) the
legal basis or appropriation law or ordinance which earmarks a specific
amount or project to NGOs; and (ii) a statement that the project shall be
limited to NGOs.
5.3 The determination of an NGO’s eligibility shall be based on the submission of
the documents enumerated under Sections 23.1 and 24.1 of the IRR.258
However:
5.3.1 In lieu of the registration certificate issued by the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), a cooperative may submit a
registration certificate issued by the Cooperatives Development
Authority (CDA);
5.3.2 In addition to the legal eligibility documents, a participating NGO
must submit its latest articles of incorporation in order that the
procuring entity may determine that it falls within the definition of
NGO under Item 4.2 of these Guidelines;
5.3.3 To establish the financial stability of the participating NGO, audited
financial statements for the past three (3) years must be submitted
under Section 23.1 (a) (vii) of the IRR;
259
256 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
257 Ibid.
258 Ibid.
259 Ibid.
Guidelines on NGO Participation in Public Procurement Appendix 14
248
5.3.4 Participating NGOs need not submit the financial document
prescribed Sections 23.1 (a) (viii) of the IRR260
.
5.4 Other stages of the bidding process shall be observed in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the IRR261 of R.A. 9184.
6.0 NEGOTIATED PROCUREMENT UNDER SECTION 53.11 OF IRR
6.1 To ensure transparency in the selection of NGO through negotiated
procurement, posting shall be done in accordance with Sections 54.2 and
54.3 of the IRR of R.A. 9184.262
6.2 After the required posting period, the procuring entity shall invite at least
three (3) prospective NGOs to submit sealed price quotations or passwordprotected price quotations in compressed archive folders, in case of electronic
submission of price quotations.263
6.3 The procuring entity shall likewise require submission of the complete project
proposal together with supporting feasibility studies, designs, plans,
blueprints, budgets and charts.
6.4 On the date specified in the notice, the procuring entity shall open the price
quotations and determine the Lowest Calculated Bid (LCB). For electronic
submission of price quotations, the passwords for accessing the same will be
disclosed on a specified date by the prospective NGOs to the Procuring Entity
either in person or face-to-face through videoconferencing, webcasting or
similar technology and the Procuring Entity shall determine the Lowest
Calculated Bid (LCB).264 Consistent with the nature of an NGO, no profit
should be included in its bid. Thus, the procuring entity shall ensure that the
LCB does not include any profit margin or mark-up.
6.5 After determination that the proposal submitted by the NGO with the Lowest
Calculated Bid complies with the technical requirements of the project, the
procuring entity shall require submission of the following eligibility documents
to ensure that said NGO is technically, legally, and financially capable to
undertake the proposed project:
Legal Documents
a) SEC or CDA registration certificate;
b) Latest articles of incorporation;
c) Valid and current mayor’s permit/from the NGO’s principal place of
business265;
d) Certificate of PhilGEPS266 registration;
260 Ibid.
261 Ibid.
262 Ibid.
263 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 7 May 2020, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 15 May 2020.
264 Ibid.
265 As amended by GPPB Resolution 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines on NGO Participation in Public Procurement Appendix 14
249
e) Taxpayer’s Identification Number; and
f) Latest tax returns and tax clearance pursuant to Executive Order No.
398, s. of 2005;
Technical Documents
g) Statement of all its ongoing and completed government and private
contracts within the relevant period, where applicable, including
contracts awarded but not yet started, if any in accordance with Section
23.1 (a) (iv) of the IRR267 of R.A. 9184;
h) In the case of procurement of infrastructure projects, the prospective
bidder’s statement of:
h.1 Availability of its key personnel, such as project managers, project
engineers, materials engineers and foremen, that may be used for
construction contracts;
h.2 Personnel performing functions that are regulated by laws of the
Philippines are registered professionals authorized by the
appropriate regulatory body to practice those and allied
professions
h.3 Availability of equipment that it owns, has under lease, and/or has
under purchase agreements that may be used for construction
contracts, provided that ownership of equipment is not a requisite
for eligibility.
Financial Documents
i) Audited financial statements for the past three (3) years, stamped
“received” by the BIR or its duly accredited and authorized institutions,
showing, among others, its total and current assets and liabilities.268
6.6 After submission of the eligibility documents, the procuring entity shall enter
into a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with the NGO which prescribes:
a) the terms of reference for the project
b) commitment to comply with technical requirements of the project
c) systems and procedures for project monitoring and implementation
d) timelines, such as, but not limited to, date of completion, periodic
inspection or evaluation schedule, and reporting
e) terms of payment, which shall be in accordance with Item 7 herein
266 Ibid.
267 Ibid.
268 Ibid.
Guidelines on NGO Participation in Public Procurement Appendix 14
250
6.7 To guarantee its faithful performance, the selected NGO shall post a
Performance Security upon the signing of the MOA in accordance with Section
39 of the IRR.269
6.8 After performance of its obligations under the MOA, the selected NGO shall
likewise submit a warranty security in accordance with Section 62 of the IRR.
7.0 TERMS OF PAYMENT
7.1 Payment to the NGO shall be made on a staggered basis. As a general rule,
the selected NGO shall not receive additional payment unless
reporting/liquidation requirements of the previous payment shall have been
complied with.
7.2 Release of funds to the NGO shall follow the payment schedule prescribed by
the MOA or contract.
7.3 No funds may be released prior to signing of the MOA or contract.
7.4 The selected NGO shall return any amount not utilized upon completion of
the project.
8.0 EFFECTIVITY
These guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation.270
269 Ibid.
270 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 012-2007, dated 29 June 2007, and published in the Manila Times on 26 October 2007.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
251
APPENDIX 15
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR CONTRACT PRICE ESCALATION
1.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
1.1. These Guidelines shall govern requests for price escalation during
implementation of contracts for the procurement of goods and infrastructure
projects under extraordinary circumstances pursuant to and in accordance
with Section 61 of Republic Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184), otherwise known as
“Government Procurement Reform Act” and its Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR).271 No contract price escalation for consulting services shall
be allowed.
1.2. These Guidelines shall apply to all branches, constitutional commissions and
offices, agencies, departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the
Government, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations
(GOCCs), government financial institutions (GFIs), state universities and
colleges (SUCs), and local government units (LGUs).
2.0 PURPOSE
These Guidelines are being formulated to meet the following objectives:
2.1. To prescribe the rules and procedures in the approval by the Government
Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) of requests for price escalation;
2.2. To ensure that the task mandated by Section 61 of R.A. 9184 shall be
undertaken competently, objectively and expeditiously by the GPPB and the
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA); and
2.3. To establish the legal and technical parameters for an objective determination
of events that will result to extraordinary circumstances in accordance with
the Civil Code of the Philippines.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1. Price Escalation. Refers to an increase in the contract price during contract
implementation on the basis of the existence of “extraordinary circumstances”
as determined by the NEDA and upon prior approval of the GPPB.
3.2. Extraordinary Circumstances. Refers to an event or occurrence, or series
of events or occurrences during contract implementation which give/s rise to
price escalation as may be determined by the NEDA, in accordance with the
provisions of the Civil Code of the Philippines, as enumerated in Section 4
hereof.
3.3. Extraordinary Inflation or Deflation. Refers to the decrease or increase
of the purchasing power of the Philippine currency which is unusual or
beyond the common fluctuation in the value of said currency, in accordance
with the two (2) standard deviation rule computed under Section 5.2.2 of
271 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
252
these Guidelines, and such decrease or increase could not have been
reasonably foreseen or was manifestly beyond the contemplation of the
parties at the time of the establishment of the obligation.
3.4. Fortuitous Event. Refers to an occurrence or happening which could not
be foreseen, or even if foreseen, is inevitable. It is necessary that the
contractor or supplier is free from negligence. Fortuitous events may be
produced by two (2) general causes: (1) by nature, such as but not limited
to, earthquakes, storms, floods, epidemics, fires, and (2) by acts of men,
such as but not limited to, armed invasion, attack by bandits, governmental
prohibitions, robbery, provided that they have the force of an imposition
which the contractor or supplier could not have resisted.
3.5. WPI. Refers to the Wholesale Price Index, which measures the monthly
changes in the general price level of commodities, usually in large quantities,
that flow into the wholesale trading system.
3.6. CPI. Refers to the Consumer Price Index, which measures the monthly
changes in the average retail prices of goods and services commonly
purchased by a particular group of people in a particular area.
3.7. PPI. Refers to the Producer Price Index, which measures the average
change in the unit price of a commodity as it leaves the establishment of the
producer.
4.0 EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES
For purposes of these Guidelines, the term “extraordinary circumstances” shall refer
to the following articles of the Civil Code of the Philippines:
4.1. Article 1174, as it pertains to Ordinary Fortuitous Events or those events
which ordinarily happen or which could be reasonably foreseen but are
inevitable, such as, but not limited to the following:
a. Typhoons;
b. Thunderstorms;
c. Flooding of lowly areas; and
d. Vehicular accidents;
Provided that the following requisites are present:
(i) The cause of the extraordinary circumstance must be independent of
the will of the parties;
(ii) The event must be either unforeseeable or unavoidable;
(iii) The event must be such as to render it difficult but not impossible for
the supplier or contractor to fulfill his obligation in a normal manner or
within the contemplation of the parties;
(iv) The supplier or contractor must be free from any participation in or
aggravation of the injury to the procuring entity; and
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
253
(v) The allowance for price escalation should an ordinary fortuitous event
occur is stipulated by the parties or the nature of the obligation
requires the assumption of risk.
4.2. Article 1250, as it pertains to Extraordinary Inflation or Deflation, as defined
in Section 3.3 hereof.
4.3. Article 1680, as it enumerates Extraordinary Fortuitous Events or those
events which do not usually happen, such as, but not limited to the following:
a. Fire;
b. War;
c. Pestilence;
d. Unusual flood;
e. Locusts; and
f. Earthquake;
Provided that the circumstances before, during and after the event shall be
taken into consideration.
5.0 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
In the review and approval of a request for price escalation, the requesting procuring
entity shall comply with the following conditions before the same can be acted upon:
5.1. Endorsement. The head of the procuring entity concerned shall endorse the
request for price escalation to the NEDA, through its Director-General,
accompanied by the following documents:
a. A certification from the head of the procuring entity stating that the
request for price escalation is justified in accordance with R.A. 9184, its
IRR, and these Guidelines;
b. A description of the nature of the requested price escalation as well as
the identification of the specific legal and technical parameters stated in
these Guidelines that have been complied with by the request. For the
technical requirements, supporting documents shall contain
information/data in accordance with Section 5.2.2 hereof;
c. Certified copy of the original contract including the original scope of
work and the original contract price, as awarded;
d. Original cost estimates and/or bill of materials of the items, goods or
components affected by the request for price escalation and the
proposed escalated prices thereof, as applicable to the type of contract,
including a summary computation by the requesting entity of the
proposed escalated prices in accordance with Sections 5.2.2 or 5.3, as
deemed applicable; Provided, however, that the procuring entity shall
maintain a detailed computation of the proposed price escalation;
e. Original and, if applicable, revised schedule of contract implementation;
f. Original request for price escalation submitted by the
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
254
contractor/supplier to the procuring entity, including information on the
quantity of materials/components and/or scope of work being proposed
for price escalation;
g. Data on the price indices of the materials or goods, including the source
of data used in the detailed computation of the proposed price
escalation as referred to in item (d) above, covering a historical thirty
(30)-month period reckoned from the date of bid opening; and
h. Other information/documents as may be required by NEDA/GPPB.
5.2. Two-Stage Review Process. The review process shall commence only after
the NEDA has acknowledged the completeness of the request in accordance
with this Section. A request for price escalation shall only be granted if it
satisfies both the First and Second Stage reviews.
5.2.1. First Stage: Legal Parameters. This stage shall establish the legal
basis for extraordinary circumstances that will allow contract price
escalation. The determination shall strictly be in accordance with
any of the extraordinary circumstances mentioned in Section 4 of
these Guidelines.
5.2.2. Second Stage: Technical Parameters. After establishing the legal
basis under the First Stage review, the request for price escalation
shall be further reviewed in accordance with the technical
parameters stipulated herein.
a. Standard Deviation. The escalation in the price of an item,
good, or component, as requested, should at least be two (2)
standard deviations from the mean calculated based on the
historical trend of applicable price indices covering a historical
data of thirty (30)-months reckoned from the date of bid
opening. In computing for the standard deviation, the following
shall be observed:3333
(i) The prevailing monthly price index to be used in
computing the mean shall be determined based on the
volatility of the price concerned. Data for a locally
available good, item, or component shall be those
issued/published by the appropriate entity.
(ii) In case of an international good, item, or component
wherein appropriate data is not available from domestic
sources, data shall be those issued/published by the
appropriate foreign entity.
(iii) In case of variation orders involving work items exactly the
same or similar to those in the original contract, the
applicable price indices for said work items prevailing on
the date of bid opening of the original contract shall be
used.
(iv) In case of variation orders involving new work items, the
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
255
applicable price indices for said new work items prevailing
on the date the variation order was approved shall be
used.
b. Ten Percent (10%) Increase. If there are no available historical
data for the appropriate price indices such that Section 5.2.2
(a) above becomes inapplicable, the request for price
escalation of an item, good or component shall be reviewed
pursuant to this section wherein the subject applicable price
index of a request should have registered an increase of more
than ten percent (10%), as determined from the prevailing
price index on the date of bid opening.
In case there are no applicable price indices for the item, good, or
component, the applicable general wholesale price index shall be
used.
5.2.3. Detailed Technical Parameters/Applicable Price Indices for Goods.
The detailed computation and validation of price escalation for
goods as described in Section 5.2.2 above shall use the most
appropriate price index of the commodity group under the three
types of price indices, WPI, CPI, and PPI; Provided that, based on
availability and applicability, the WPI for the commodity group shall
first be utilized, followed by the CPI, and lastly the PPI. The indices
for commodity groups shall be those presented under Annex A, as
classified and issued by the National Statistics Office (NSO). For an
item, good or component wherein the prevailing price index cannot
be established, the review shall be conducted utilizing the most
relevant and applicable index.
5.2.4. Detailed Technical Parameters/Applicable Price Indices for
Infrastructure Projects. The detailed computation and validation of
price escalation for infrastructure projects as described in Section
5.2.2 above shall use the fluctuation factor K representing the
increase or decrease of the value of an item as a result of price
fluctuation.
a. The value K varies for each item of work and is represented by
the following:
K = a + b (Xi/Xo) + c (Yi/Yo) + d (Zi/Zo) + … n (Ni/No)
Where:
a = is a 0.15 fixed coefficient
representing contractor’s profit,
and other non-adjustable items.
b, c, d, … n = are the coefficients representing
the proportionate value of each
pay item to the total. b + c + d
… + n = 0.85.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
256
Xi, Yi, Zi, … Ni = are variables representing the
current price indices of the cost
of labor, materials and other
components of the contract
during the period under
consideration at the time of the
request for price escalation,
based on the original or duly
approved revised schedule of
contract implementation,
subject to Section 8 hereof.
Xo, Yo, Zo, … No = are variables representing the
current price indices of the cost
of labor, materials and other
components of the contract on
the date of bid opening or
approval of variation order.
The sum of a + b + x + … n must be equal to 1 (100%)
b. The fluctuation factor and its application in the parametric
formula shall include, among others, those listed in Annex B.
5.3. Amount of Price Escalation to be Granted. After this determination, the
amount of escalation to be granted in the case of goods should only be the
remaining amount over and above the thresholds as computed under
Sections 5.2.2 (a) or 5.2.2 (b) hereof. In the case of infrastructure projects,
the amount to be granted shall be determined based on the following:
Where K > 1.05, P = Po (K – 0.05)
Where 0.95 < K < 1.05, P = Po
Where K < 0.95, P = Po (K + 0.05)
Where P
Po
K
- escalated bid/unit price
- original bid/unit price
- fluctuation factor
5.4. Period and Frequency of Requests for Price Escalation. Requests for price
escalation shall only be made for cost items already incurred by the
contractor/supplier, as supported by official receipts, sales invoices, or other
documentary evidence. No request for price escalation shall be made for
prospective application. Further, price escalation shall only be granted to
those items included in a specific request; Provided further, that requests for
price escalation shall be made not less than six (6) months reckoned from the
date of the effectivity of the contract, and not less than six (6)-month period
thereafter, except for price escalation being requested at the completion of
the contract.
5.5. Misrepresentation. Any misrepresentation made by the procuring entity or the
contractor/supplier in any stage of the processing of a particular request for
price escalation shall cause the automatic denial/disapproval of said claim.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
257
5.6. Recommendation/Approval. Pursuant to Section 61.3 of the IRR272 of R.A.
9184, the burden of proving the occurrence of extraordinary circumstances
that will allow for price escalation shall rest with the procuring entity
requesting for such escalation. NEDA shall only respond to such request after
receiving the necessary proof and documentation. Upon completion of its
review pursuant to Section 5.2 hereof, NEDA shall submit its
recommendations to the GPPB for appropriate action. The GPPB shall then
approve/act upon the request for price escalation during one of its meetings,
to be attended by the head of the procuring entity concerned or his duly
authorized representative/s.
6.0 REVIEW OF CONTRACT PRICES AFTER COMPLETION OF THE CONTRACT
Upon completion of the contract, the procuring entity shall calculate the amount of
price escalation supposedly due the contractor/supplier/consultant to consider
likewise any downward movement in prices during the entire contract
implementation period. If the resulting amount of price escalation is lower than the
amount of price escalation already paid, the amount of overpayment shall be
deducted by the procuring entity from the retention money, in case of infrastructure
projects, or the warranty security, in case of goods, on or before its expiration.
7.0 AUTHORITY TO APPROVE CONTRACT PRICE ESCALATION
7.1. The head of the procuring entity shall not pay any contract price escalation
until after the GPPB has approved the claim.
7.2. The approval by the GPPB of the request for contract price escalation shall in
no way be construed as an approval or validation of any irregularity
committed by the requesting entity during the procurement process.
8.0 OTHER CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL
8.1. In case the project is behind schedule based on the approved Project
Evaluation Review Technique/Critical Path Method (PERT/CPM) network or
schedule, price escalation on the portion of work that should have been, but
was not, actually accomplished within the period shall be based on the
applicable price index for the period in which it should have been
accomplished. Payment of the computed amount shall not be made until said
unaccomplished portion of the work is completed and upon prior approval of
the GPPB and the head of the procuring entity.
8.2. Where advance payment has been made, no price escalation shall be granted
for the following:
a. That portion of work accomplished during the period corresponding to a
value equal to the amount of recoupment of advance payment; and
b. The amount of materials for which advance payment was made.
9.0 AMENDMENT AND ADDENDA
272 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
258
The GPPB may amend these Guidelines as may be necessary. Nevertheless, the
GPPB may formulate supplemental guidelines in the form of addenda or annexes for
the review process as stipulated in Section 5.2 hereof without need of amending
these Guidelines.
10.0 TRANSITORY CLAUSE
10.1. Claims for price escalation for contracts completed after the effectivity of
these Guidelines shall be filed within two (2) years from completion of the
contract concerned.
10.2. Claims for price escalation for contracts the Invitation to Apply for Eligibility
and to Bid (IAEB) for which were issued after the effectivity of R.A. 9184 and
completed before the effectivity of these Guidelines shall be filed not later
than two (2) years from the date of effectivity of these Guidelines.
10.3. The thirty (30) – month historical data prescribed in computing for two (2)
standard deviations as provided in Section 5.2.2.a shall apply to price
escalation claims for contracts the IAEB for which were issued after the
effectivity of these Guidelines.
11.0 EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE
These Guidelines or any amendments thereof shall take effect immediately after
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general nationwide circulation
and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified
copies of these Guidelines.273
273 Published in the Manila Times on 22 October 2008.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
259
ANNEX A. PRICE INDICES FOR COMMODITY GROUPS
The indices listed herein shall be used for the detailed computation and validation of price
escalation for goods
WPI Commodity Groups:
a.1 food;
a.2 beverages and tobacco;
a.3 crude materials except fuel;
a.4 mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials;
a.5 chemicals including animal and vegetable oils and fats;
a.6 manufactured goods classified chiefly by materials;
a.7 machinery and transport equipment; and
a.8 miscellaneous manufactured articles.
CPI Commodity Groups:
b.1 food, beverages and tobacco;
b.2 clothing;
b.3 housing and repairs;
b.4 fuel, light and water;
b.5 services; and
b.6 miscellaneous.
PPI Commodity Groups.
c.1 beverage;
c.2 tobacco;
c.3 textile;
c.4 leather products;
c.5 footwear and wearing apparel;
c.6 wood and wood products;
c.7 furniture and fixtures;
c.8 paper and paper products;
c.9 publishing and printing;
c.10 chemical products;
c.11 petroleum products;
c.12 rubber products;
c.13 plastic products;
c.14 non-metallic mineral products;
c.15 miscellaneous non-metallic mineral;
c.16 glass and glass products;
c.17 cement;
c.18 basic metals;
c.19 iron and steel;
c.20 non-ferrous metal;
c.21 fabricated metal products;
c.22 machinery;
c.23 electrical machinery;
c.24 transport equipment; and
c.25 other manufacturing industries.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
260
ANNEX B. PARAMETRIC FORMULA FOR INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
The fluctuation factor and its application in the parametric formula shall include among
others, any or combination of the following:
1. Common earthwork fluctuation factor for clearing and grubbing, subgrade
preparation, common excavation, common borrow, embankment construction,
common fill or backfill and select borrow.
K1 = 0.15 + 0.05 (Li/Lo) + 0.60 (Ei/Eo) + 0.20 (Fi/Fo)
2. Rock excavation fluctuation factor
K2 = 0.15 + 0.08 (Li/Lo) + 0.27 (Zi/Zo) + 0.12 (Fi/Fo) + 0.38 (Ei/Eo)
3. Structural excavation fluctuation factor
K3 = 0.15 + 0.08 (Li/Lo) + 0.19 (Fi/Fo) + 0.58 (Ei/Eo)
4. Structural backfill fluctuation factor
K4 = 0.15 + 0.15 (Li/Lo) + 0.17 (Fi/Fo) + 0.53 (Ei/Eo)
5. Daywork fluctuation factor for equipment
K5 = 0.15 + 0.05 (Li/Lo) + 0.20 (Fi/Fo) + 0.60 (Ei/Eo)
6. Daywork fluctuation factor for labor
K6 = 0.15 + 0.85 (Li/Lo)
7. Graded subbase or vase course fluctuation factor using screened or processed
aggregate, granular materials, crushed adobe or the like
K7= 0.15 + 0.02 (Li/Lo) + 0.62 (Bi/Bo) + 0.05 (Fi/Fo) + 0.16 (Ei/Eo)
8. Asphaltic materials fluctuation factor for prime or tack coat.
K8 = 0.15 + 0.01 (Li/Lo) + 0.82(Ai/Ao) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.01 (Ei/Eo)
9. Asphaltic concrete fluctuation factor for bituminous wearing or surface course
K9 = 0.15 + 0.01 (Li/Lo) + 0.62 (Ai/Ao) + 0.12 (Bi/Bo) + 0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.07
(Ei/Eo)
10. Portland cement concrete pavement (PDCP) fluctuation factor
K10 = 0.15 + 0.02 (Li/Lo) + 0.47 (Ci/Co) + 0.21 (Bi/Bo) + 0.02 (Di/Do) +
0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.10 (Ei/Eo)
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
261
11. Concrete fluctuation factor for curb, gutter and sidewalk
K11 = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.36 (Ci/Co) + 0.16 (Bi/Bo) + 0.03 (Di/Do) +
0.06 Fi/Fo) + 0.18 (Ei/Eo)
12. Reinforced concrete structures fluctuation factor for bridge, culvert, retaining wall,
bulkhead, piles, precast, parapet wall, railing, footing, columns, supporting slab
and beam
K12 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0.28 (Ci/Co) + 0.13 (Bi/Bo) + 0.03 (Di/Do) +
0.25 (Ri/Ro) + 0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.10 (Ei/Eo)
13. Reinforced concrete structures fluctuation factor for headwall, catch basin,
manhole, drop inlet concrete post.
K13 = 0.15 + 0.21 (Li/Lo) + 0.25 (Ci/Co) + 0.03 (Di/Do) + 0.19 (Ri/Ro) +
0.09 (Bi/Bo) + 0.02 (Fi/Fo) + 0.06 (Ei/Eo)
14. Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) or culvert pipe (RCCP) fluctuation factor
K14 = 0.15 + 0.05 (Li/Lo) + 0.61 (Qi/Qo) + 0.02 (Ci/Co) + 0.01 (Bi/Bo) +
0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.12 (Ei/Eo)
15. Non-reinforced concrete pipes fluctuation factor
K15 = 0.15 + 0.13 (Li/Lo) + 0.69 (Qi/Qo) + 0.02 (Ci/Co) + 0.01 (Bi/Bo)
16. Concrete for structure Class A or B fluctuation factor
K16 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0.41 (Ci/Co) + 0.19 (Bi/Bo) + 0.09 (Di/Do) +
0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.09 (Ei/Eo)
17. Grouted rip-rap or stone masonry fluctuation factor
K17 = 0.15 + 0.18 (Li/Lo) + 0.27 (Ci/Co) + 0.13 (Bi/Bo) + 0.07 (Fi/Fo) +
0.20 (Ei/Eo)
18. Concrete masonry (CHB) fluctuation factor
K18 = 0.15 + 0.33 (Li/Lo) + 0.30 (Qi/Qo) + 0.13 (Ci/Co) + 0.04 (Bi/Bo) +
0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.04 (Ei/Eo)
19. Reinforcing steel bars fluctuation factor
K19 = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
20. Structural steel works fluctuation factor
K20 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0.71 (Si/So) + 0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
21. Demolition of concrete structure fluctuation factor
K21 = 0.15 + 0.07 (Li/Lo) + 0.20 (Fi/Fo) + 0.58 (Ei/Eo)
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
262
22. Demolition of PCCP strip fluctuation factor
K22 = 0.15 + 0.09 (Li/Lo) + 0.19 (Fi/Fo) + 0.57 (Ei/Eo)
23. Demolition AC pavement strip fluctuation factor
K23 = 0.15 + 0.05 (Li/Lo) + 0.20 (Fi/Fo) + 0.60 (Ei/Eo)
24. Painting fluctuation factor with use of equipment
K24 = 0.15 + 0.28 (Li/Lo) + 0.48 (Ni/No) + 0.02 (Fi/Fo) + 0.07 (Ei/Eo)
25. Painting fluctuation factor using labor only
K25 = 0.15 + 0.19 (Li/Lo) + 0.66 (Ni/No)
26. Wood structure fluctuation factor for falsework, temporary wood bridge, wood
guardrail
K26 = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.63 (Di/Do) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.12 (Ei/Eo)
27. Carpentry works fluctuation factor
K27 = 0.15 + 0.15 (Li/Lo) + 0.62 (Di/Do) + 0.02 (Fi/Fo) + 0.06 (Ei/Eo)
28. Cast and / or galvanized iron pipes fluctuation factor
K28 = 0.15 + 0.02 (Li/Lo) + 0.78 (Ii/Io) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.04 (Ei/Eo)
29. Steel pipes fluctuation factor
K29 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0 .69 (Ii/Io) + 0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.10 (Ei/Eo)
30. Asbestos cement pipes fluctuation factor
K30 = 0.15 + 0.02 (Li/Lo) + 0.77 (Ki/Ko) + 0.02 (Fi/Fo) + 0.04 (Ei/Eo)
31. PVC pipes fluctuation factor
K31 = 0.15 + 0.07 (Li/Lo) + 0.69 (Ji/Jo) + 0.02 (Fi/Fo) + 0.07 (Ei/Eo)
32. Gate valves and fire hydrants fluctuation factor
K32 = 0.15 + 0.04 (Li/Lo) + 0.77 (Ii/Io) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.03 (Ei/Eo)
33. Check valves fluctuation factor
K33 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0.79 (Pi/Po) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.02 (Ei/Eo)
34. Water service connection fluctuation factor
K34 = 0.15 + 0.10 (Li/Lo) + 0.40 (Pi/Po) + 0.35 (Ji/Jo)
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
263
35. Plumbing fixtures fluctuation factor
K35 = 0.15 + 0.08 (Li/Lo) + 0.77 (Pi/Po)
36. Plain and corrugated G.1 sheets fluctuation factor
K36 = 0.15 + 0.09 (Li/Lo) + 0.76 (Wi/Wo)
37. Cement plaster fluctuation factor
K37 = 0.15 + 0.38 (Li/Lo) + 0.37 (Ci/Co) + 0.10 (Bi/Bo)
38. Marble floor finish fluctuation factor
K38 = 0.15 + 0.07 (Li/Lo) + 0.03 (Ci/Co) + 0.01 (Bi/Bo) + 0.65 (Xi/Xo) +
0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.06 (Ei/Eo)
39. Glazed and ceramic tiles fluctuation factor
K39 = 0.15 + 0.12 (Li/Lo) + 0.66 (Xi/Xo) + 0.05 (Ci/Co) + 0.02 (Bi/Bo)
40. Window frames and grills fluctuation factor
K40 = 0.15 + 0.09 (Li/Lo) + 0.53 (Si/So) + 0.06 (Fi/Fo) + 0.17 (Ei/Eo)
41. Glazing fluctuation factor
K41 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0.82 (Gi/Go)
42. Electrical rough-in fluctuation factor
K42 = 0.15 + 0.16 (Li/Lo) + 0.69 (Vi/Vo)
43. Lighting fixtures and devices fluctuation factor
K43 = 0.15 + 0.13 (Li/Lo) + 0.72 (Ui/Uo)
44. PVC waterstop (9”) fluctuation factor
K44 = 0.15 + 0.03 (Li/Lo) + 0.82 (Ji/Jo)
45. Electrical wood pole fluctuation factor
K45 = 0.15 + 0.01 (Li/Lo) + 0.73 (Di/Do) + 0.03 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
46. Wood crossarm fluctuation factor
K46 = 0.15 + 0.11 (Li/Lo) + 0.74 (Di/Do)
47. Lightning arrester (3,000v to 15,000v) fluctuation factor
K47 = 0.15 + 0.09 (Li/Lo) + 0.76 (Ti/To)
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
264
48. Transformers (10KVA to 50KVA) fluctuation factor
K48 = 0.15 + 0.01 (Li/Lo) + 0.81 (Ti/To) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.02 (Ei/Eo)
49. Bare copper wire fluctuation factor
K49 = 0.15 + 0.04 (Li/Lo) + 0.79 (Ti/To) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.01 (Ei/Eo)
50. Bare aluminum wire fluctuation factor
K50 = 0.15 + 0.13 (Li/Lo) + 0.69 (Ti/To) + 0.01 (Fi/Fo) + 0.02 (Ei/Eo)
51. Dredging fluctuation factor
K51 = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.20 (Fi/Fo) + 0.59 (Ei/Eo)
52. General construction fluctuation factor (for others not covered by any or
combination of the above 51 fluctuation factors)
K52 = 0.15 + 0.85 (MI/Mo)
Where:
Mi - current general construction price index figure
Mo - base general construction price index figure
Li - current labor index figure
Lo - base labor index figure
Ei - current equipment index figure
Eo - base equipment index figure
Ai - current asphaltic material price index figure
Ao - base asphaltic material price index figure
Bi - current aggregates material price index figure
Bo - base aggregates material price index figure
Ci - current cement price index figure
Co - base cement material price index figure
Di - current lumber material price index figure
Do - base lumber material price index figure
Fi - current automotive fuel price index figure
Fo - base automotive fuel price index figure
Gi - current glass and glazing material price index figure
Go - base glass and glazing material price index figure
Hi - current hardware material price index figure
Ho - base hardware material price index figure
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
265
Ii - current galvanized and / or cast-iron pipe (Plumbing) material price index
figure
Io - base galvanized and / or cast-iron pipe (Plumbing) material price index figure
Ji - current polyvinyl chloride pipe (Plumbing) material price index figure
Jo - base polyvinyl chloride pipe (Plumbing) material price index figure
Ki - current asbestos cement pipe (Plumbing) material price index figure
Ko - base asbestos cement pipe (Plumbing) material price index figure
Ni - current paint material price index figure
No - base paint material price index figure
Pi - current plumbing fixture material price index figure
Po - base plumbing fixture material price index figure
Qi - current concrete products material price index figure
Qo - base concrete products material price index figure
Ri - current reinforcing steel material price index figure
Ro - base reinforcing steel material price index figure
Si - current structural steel material price index figure
So - base structural steel material price index figure
Ti - current exterior electrical material price index figure
To - base exterior electrical material price index figure
Ui - current electrical fixtures / devices material price index figure
Uo - base electrical fixtures / devices material price index figure
Vi - current electrical (rough-in) material price index figure
Vo - base electrical (rough-in) material price index figure
Wi - current metal products material price index figure
Wo - base metal products material price index figure
Xi - current tile work material price index figure
Xo - base tile work material price index figure
Zi - current blasting material price index figure
Zo - base blasting material price index figure
For the preceding formula, the following Price Indices shall be used:
General construction price index as published by the National Statistics Office (NSO) or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Labor cost index as published by the Department of Labor and Employment. Equipment
index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized government agency.
Asphaltic material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
266
government agency.
Aggregates material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Cement material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Lumber material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Automotive fuel price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Glass and glazing material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Hardware material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Galvanized and/or cast-iron pipe (Plumbing) material price index as published by the NSO or
other appropriate/authorized government agency.
Polyvinyl chloride pipe (Plumbing) material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Asbestos cement (Plumbing) material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Paint material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Plumbing fixture material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Concrete products material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Reinforcing steel material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Structural steel material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Exterior electrical material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Electrical (rough-in) material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Electrical fixtures / devices material price index as published by the NSO or other
appropriate/authorized government agency.
Metal product material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
267
government agency.
Tile work material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
Blasting material price index as published by the NSO or other appropriate/authorized
government agency.
In the absence of any price index for a specified adjustable item, the price index of the
nearest related item shall be used.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
268
ANNEX C. SAMPLE COMPUTATION FOR CONTRACT PRICE ESCALATION
I. FACTS
1. There is legal basis to claim for price escalation in accordance with Section 4 of these
Guidelines.
2. The work item identified to have been affected by the extraordinary circumstance is
Reinforcing Steel Bars or K19 of Annex B of these Guidelines.
K19 = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
Where L ~ refers to labor index
R ~ refers to reinforcing steel bars wholesale price index
F ~ refers to automotive fuel price index
E ~ refers to equipment price index
i ~ refers to the value of the index for the month under consideration
o ~ refers to the value of the index during opening of bid
3. The date of bid opening for the subject contract was December 2007 and the
contract was implemented starting January 2008.
4. The six (6) – month period under consideration for contract price escalation is from
January to June 2008.
5. The thirty (30) – month historical data for the components of K19 necessary for
testing compliance with the Technical Parameters under Section 5.2.2 of these
Guidelines is from July 2005 to December 2007 (Please refer to Table 1 of this Annex
for the relevant price indices provided under Annex B of these Guidelines).
II. COMPUTATION FOR GRANT OF PRICE ESCALATION
The following steps illustrate how to determine whether request for price escalation may
be granted using the 2 Standard Deviation (STDEV) rule under Section 5.2.2.a:
1. Compute the Mean for each component of K19 using the data in Table 1 for the
entire thirty (30) month period (July 2005 to December 2007).
Table 1: Computation for the Mean
K19 Component Formula for Mean Mean
Labor (L) ∑L from Jul05 to Dec07
30 343.7
Reinforcing Steel (R) ∑R from Jul05 to Dec07
30 524.7
Automotive Fuel (F) ∑F from Jul05 to Dec07
30 536.9
Equipment (E) ∑E from Jul05 to Dec07
30 321.4
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
269
2. Compute the 2 STDEV above Mean (2σ+μ) of each K19 component by adding the
Mean computed under Step 1 to the 2 STDEV. The 2 STDEV is computed by getting
the STDEV of the thirty (30) – month historical data of each K19 component and
multiplying it by 2.274
Table 2: Computation for the 2 STDEV above Mean
K19 Component
STDEV
[STDEV (Jul05 to
Dec07)]
2 STDEV
[(STDEV) * 2]
2σ+μ
[2 STDEV +
Mean]
Labor (L) 14.1 28.2 371.87
Reinforcing Steel
(R) 19.2 38.4 563.02
Automotive Fuel (F) 32.3 64.6 501.50
Equipment (E) 10.5 20.9 342.31
3. Establish the K19 Threshold by substituting the values of the 2 STDEV above Mean
computed in Step 2 into the K19 work item formula as follows:
K19 Threshold = 0.15 + 0.06 (2σ+μ)L + 0.67 (2σ+μ)R + 0.04 (2σ+μ)F +
0.08 (2σ+μ)E
= 0.15 + 0.06 (371.87) + 0.67 (563.02) + 0.04
(501.50)
+ 0.08 (342.31)
= 447.13
4. Compute the Average Value of each price index for the six (6) – month period
(January to June 2008) under consideration for contract price escalation. (Please
refer to Table 1 of this Annex)
Table 3: Computation for Average Value of Price Index (Jan to Jun 2008)
K19 Component Average Value
Labor (L) 364.8
Reinforcing Steel (R) 625.1
Automotive Fuel (F) 542.1
Equipment (E) 328.7
5. Establish K19 Average by computing the six (6) – month Average Value of the work
item for the period under consideration for price escalation (January to June 2008)
as follows:
K19 Average = 0.15 + 0.06 (Ave. Value)L + 0.67 (Ave. Value)R + 0.04
(Ave. Value)F + 0.08 (Ave. Value)E
274 Computation of the STDEV is easily done using spreadsheet applications such as Apple Numbers, Microsoft Excel, and
OpenOffice.org Calc.
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
270
K19 Average = 0.15 + 0.06 (364.8) + 0.67 (625.1) + 0.04 (542.1) +
0.08 (328.7)
K19 Average = 488.8
6. To determine whether request for price escalation may be granted, the K19 Average
should be compared to the K19 Threshold. If K19 Average is greater than K19
Threshold, price escalation may be granted; otherwise, the request for price
escalation should be denied.
7. In the above example, K19 Average is greater than K19 Threshold. Therefore, price
escalation may be granted for the period of January to June 2008.
III. COMPUTATION FOR AMOUNT OF PRICE ESCALATION
After determining that price escalation may be granted for the period under
consideration, the computation for the amount to be granted is done for each month
of said period.
1. Compute the Monthly Rates of Increase for the period under consideration
(January to June 2008) in accordance with Section 5.2.4.a of these Guidelines as
follows:
K19 June = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
= 0.15 + 0.06 (1.05) + 0.67 (1.31) + 0.04 (1.25) + 0.08 (1.12)
= 1.23
K19 May = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
= 0.15 + 0.06 (1.00) + 0.67 (1.16) + 0.04 (1.11) + 0.08 (1.12)
= 1.12
K19 April = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
= 0.15 + 0.06 (1.00) + 0.67 (1.10) + 0.04 (1.04) + 0.08 (1.12)
= 1.08
K19 Mar = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
= 0.15 + 0.06 (1.00) + 0.67 (1.05) + 0.04 (1.01) + 0.08 (1.12)
= 1.04
K19 Feb = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
= 0.15 + 0.06 (1.00) + 0.67 (1.03) + 0.04 (0.98) + 0.08 (1.12)
= 1.03
K19 Jan = 0.15 + 0.06 (Li/Lo) + 0.67 (Ri/Ro) + 0.04 (Fi/Fo) + 0.08 (Ei/Eo)
= 0.15 + 0.06 (1.00) + 0.67 (1.03) + 0.04 (1.00) + 0.08 (1.12)
= 1.03
2. Compute the Percentage Rate of Increase for the work item for each month of the
period under consideration in accordance with Section 5.3 as follows:
PJune = Po (1.23 – 0.05)
= Po (1.18)
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
271
PMay =
=
Po (1.12 – 0.05)
Po (1.07)
PApril = Po (1.08 – 0.05)
= Po (1.03)
PMar = Po
PFeb = Po
PJan = Po
This shows that the Escalated Value of the work item for the months of June, May,
and April is 18%, 7%, and 3%, respectively, higher than the original value of the
work item.
3. Compute the Escalated Value to be granted for the work item by applying the
Percentage Rate of Increase for each month to the monthly billing, which should
be supported by official receipts, sales invoices, and other acceptable documentary
evidence, as follows:
Table 4: Computation for the Escalated Value
Month Percentage Rate
of Increase
Monthly Billing Escalated Value
January 0 P1 Million 0
February 0 P1 Million 0
March 0 P1 Million 0
April 3 P1 Million P30,000
May 7 P1 Million P70,000
June 18 P1 Million P180,000
Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation Appendix 15
272
Table 1: Sample Price Indices of Variables Relevant to Work Item K19
Period Labor
( L )
Reinforcing
Steel
( R )
Automotive
Fuel
( F )
Equipment
( E )
Year Month Labor Cost Indices Indices Indices
Jun 379.0 736.5 636.6 328.7
May 362.0 652.3 565.4 328.7
Apr 362.0 616.7 529.8 328.7
Mar 362.0 587.6 511.0 328.7
Feb 362.0 578.6 500.3 328.7
2008 Jan 362.0 578.6 509.3 328.7
Dec 362.0 561.9 508.0 293.6
Nov 362.0 561.9 497.4 299.3
Oct 362.0 560.4 477.6 303.7
Sep 362.0 560.4 463.5 310.4
Aug 362.0 549.3 459.4 310.1
Jul 350.0 549.3 451.2 308.4
Jun 350.0 549.3 449.8 310.5
May 350.0 535.1 440.0 313.0
Apr 350.0 535.1 429.1 316.8
Mar 350.0 529.5 414.4 319.5
Feb 350.0 526.7 408.5 319.0
2007 Jan 350.0 525.3 427.1 321.0
Dec 350.0 524.5 425.2 328.7
Nov 350.0 526.3 426.4 328.7
Oct 350.0 522.4 435.2 328.7
Sep 350.0 522.6 455.2 328.7
Aug 350.0 522.6 475.9 328.7
Jul 350.0 530.4 471.3 328.7
Jun 350.0 520.4 465.1 328.7
May 325.0 513.0 455.2 328.7
Apr 325.0 513.0 434.4 328.7
Mar 325.0 504.3 426.3 328.7
Feb 325.0 502.1 423.5 328.7
2006 Jan 325.0 497.8 406.2 328.7
Dec 350.0 509.5 405.1 328.7
Nov 325.0 509.5 416.3 328.7
Oct 325.0 511.8 409.9 328.7
Sep 325.0 487.7 395.4 328.7
Aug 325.0 487.7 381.5 328.7
2005 Jul 325.0 489.8 371.8 328.7
Guidelines on Procurements Involving Foreign-Denominated
Bids, Contract Prices and Payment Using Letters of Credit
Appendix 16
273
APPENDIX 16
GUIDELINES ON PROCUREMENTS INVOLVING FOREIGN-DENOMINATED BIDS,
CONTRACT PRICES AND PAYMENT USING LETTERS OF CREDIT
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
Pursuant to Section 61 of Republic Act No. 9184 and its counterpart provision in the
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR),275 for the given scope of work in
procurement contracts as awarded, all bid prices shall be considered as fixed prices
and, therefore, not subject to price escalation during contract implementation,
except under extraordinary circumstances. Thus, to ensure that this policy is carried
out, it is required, as a matter of general rule and procedure, that all contracts be
denominated and paid in Philippine currency; except when the procuring entity
agrees that obligations shall be settled in any other currency at the time of payment,
subject to conditions provided for under these guidelines.
2.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall apply to procurement of goods involving foreign denominated
bids, contract prices in foreign and local currencies, and payments for such contracts
when done through Letters of Credit (LCs).
3.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated: (1) to implement the policy on fixed-pricing under
Section 61 of Republic Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184), otherwise known as “Government
Procurement Reform Act,” (2) to provide procedural details in the submission and
evaluation of bids when the bidders are all-foreign or mixed local and foreign; and
finally, (3) to address situations where, by the use of letters of credit as mode of
payment to manufacturers, suppliers and/or distributors, there is a resulting
increase/decrease of the actual amount of expenditure of the procuring entity
resulting from the appreciation/depreciation of the peso from the day of bid opening
through the time of the opening of LC until the time of its negotiation, including the
accrual of expenses by reason of the opening of letters of credit.
4.0 PREPARATION OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS
4.1. The procuring entity shall include in the Bidding Documents, as a separate
item in the Schedule of Requirements and in the Special Conditions of
Contract, a provisional sum to cover the possible increase of the actual
amount of expenditure of the procuring entity resulting from the
appreciation/depreciation of the peso from the day of bid opening through
the time of the opening of LC until the time of its negotiation, including the
accrual of expenses by reason of the opening of letters of credit.
4.1.1. The provisional sum shall be a fixed nominal amount as may be
determined by the procuring entity depending on the type of goods
to be procured. However, the provisional sum shall not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC). The
provisional sum shall be included in the Annual Procurement Plan.
275 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines on Procurements Involving Foreign-Denominated
Bids, Contract Prices and Payment Using Letters of Credit
Appendix 16
274
The same shall revert to the fund of the procuring entity as savings
in case of non-use.
4.1.2. In the preparation of the Annual Procurement Plan, the procuring
entity shall disaggregate, when applicable, the funds allocated for
the project and the provisional sum. The sum total of both funds
shall be the ABC.
4.2. The face value of the LC shall be determined in accordance with the following
procedures which shall be stated in the bidding documents:
4.2.1. The amount of the foreign-denominated portion of the bid stated in
the contract shall be converted to Philippine peso based on the
foreign exchange rate at the date of the LC opening.
4.2.2. If at the date of LC opening, the said peso equivalent is lower than
the peso amount stated in the contract, the face value of the LC
shall be the full amount of the foreign-denominated portion of the
bid stated in the contract.
4.2.3. If at the date of LC opening, the said peso equivalent is higher than
the peso amount stated in the contract, the face value of the LC
shall be the full amount of the foreign-denominated portion of the
bid stated in the contract, in which case, the provisional sum shall
be used to cover the difference.
4.2.4. If the effect of the foreign exchange fluctuation exceeds the
provisional sum, the excess thereof shall be borne by the bidder;
and the face value of the LC shall be the foreign equivalent of the
peso contract price plus the provisional sum.
4.3. All charges for the opening of the LC and/or incidental expenses thereto (i.e.,
bank commission, documentary stamp tax, cable, etc.) shall be for the
account of the supplier and shall be so stated in the bidding documents.
5.0 SUBMISSION AND EVALUATION OF BIDS
5.1. All bids may be denominated wholly in local currency or wholly in foreign currency,
which shall be accepted or tradeable by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas,276 or a
combination thereof; provided, however, that foreign component of bids shall cover
only imported goods as supported by import documents.
5.2. For purposes of bid evaluation and comparison, bids denominated, in whole
or in part, in foreign currency shall be converted to Philippine currency based
on the exchange rate prevailing on the day of the bid opening.
6.0 CONTRACT PRICES
6.1. As a general rule, Contracts shall be denominated and paid in Philippine
currency, except when the procuring entity agrees that obligations shall be
276 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 15-2020, dated 28 July 2020, published in the Official Gazette on 21 September 2020.
Guidelines on Procurements Involving Foreign-Denominated
Bids, Contract Prices and Payment Using Letters of Credit
Appendix 16
275
settled in any other currency, which shall be accepted or tradeable by the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas,277 subject to conditions provided for under these
guidelines.
6.1.1. In case procurement is done through competitive bidding and offers
are received in foreign currency, the foreign bid shall, in determining
the contract price, be converted to Philippine Peso based on the
prevailing rate on the date of bid opening.
6.1.2. In case procurement is made through any of the alternative
methods prescribed in the IRR278 of R.A. 9184 that do not require
the conduct of competitive bidding, and offers are received in
foreign currency, the Philippine Peso amount of the contract shall be
computed based on the exchange rate prevailing on the day of the
signing of the contract.
6.1.3. In case of repeat order under Section 51 of the IRR279 of R.A. 9184,
the contract price, either in Philippine Peso or in foreign currency,
must be the same as or lower than that in the original contract;
Provided, however, that the price is still the most advantageous to
the Government, after price comparison and verification.
7.0 PAYMENTS USING LETTERS OF CREDIT (LCs)
7.1. For procurement projects fully utilizing domestic or foreign280 funds, where
the goods will be supplied by a foreign supplier, the procuring entity, may
open LCs or similar instruments in favor of such foreign supplier from a
Government Servicing Bank. Payment/s shall be made on the letter of credit
only after the delivery and acceptance of the goods as certified by the
Procuring Entity.281
7.2. In cases where the procuring entity has to incur additional expenses resulting
from the opening of LC where it assumes the risk of foreign currency
fluctuation from time of LC opening with the issuing bank until it is eventually
negotiated with the foreign negotiating bank in the place of the foreign
supplier, said expenses shall be covered by the provisional sum.
8.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines or any amendments hereto shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation
and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified
copies of these guidelines.282
277 Ibid.
278 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
279 Ibid.
280 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 12-2019, dated 22 April 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
281 Ibid.
282 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 020-2005, dated 07 October 2005, published in the Official Gazette on 09 January
2006.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
276
APPENDIX 17
UNIFORM GUIDELINES FOR BLACKLISTING OF MANUFACTURERS, SUPPLIERS,
DISTRIBUTORS, CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS
1.0 SCOPE
These guidelines shall govern the blacklisting of manufacturers, suppliers,
distributors, contractors and consultants (“contractors” for brevity) involved in
government procurement for offenses or violations committed during competitive
bidding and contract implementation, in accordance with Section 69.4 of the
Implementing Rules and Regulations (“IRR”)283 of Republic Act No. 9184 (“R.A.
9184”), otherwise known as the “Government Procurement Reform Act.”
These guidelines shall apply to all branches, constitutional commissions and offices,
agencies, departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the Government,
including government-owned and/or controlled corporations (“GOCCs”), government
financial institutions (“GFIs”), state universities and colleges (“SUCs”), and local
government units (“LGUs”).
2.0 PROHIBITION ON BLACKLISTED PERSONS/ENTITIES TO PARTICIPATE IN
THE BIDDING OF GOVERNMENT PROJECTS/CONTRACTS
A person/entity that is blacklisted by a procuring entity and/or included in the
Government Procurement Policy Board (“GPPB”) Consolidated Blacklisting Report
shall not be allowed to participate in the bidding of all government projects during
the period of disqualification unless it is delisted as provided for in these guidelines.
Blacklisting shall apply to the following persons:284
(a)
a.) In case of individuals or sole proprietorships, to the bidders and their
spouses; 285
(n)
b.) In case of partnerships, to the partnership itself and its partners;286
(n)
c.) In case of cooperatives, to the cooperative itself and members of the
board of directors, general manager or chief executive officer;287
(n)
d.) A partnership, joint venture or consortium which is blacklisted or which has
blacklisted member/s and/or partner/s as well as a person/entity who is a
member of a blacklisted joint venture or consortium are, likewise, not
allowed to participate in any government procurement during the period of
disqualification.288
(a)
e.) In the case of corporations, a single stockholder, together with his/her
relatives up to the third civil degree of consanguinity or affinity, and their
assignees, holding at least twenty percent (20%) of the shares therein, its
chairman and president, shall be blacklisted after they have been
283 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
284 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20
November 2017.
285 Ibid.
286 Ibid.
287 Ibid.
288 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
277
determined to hold the same controlling interest in a previously blacklisted
corporation or in two corporations which have been blacklisted; the
corporations of which they are part shall also be blacklisted.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1 Appellate Authority. The department, office or government unit
exercising general and/or administrative supervision/control over the
blacklisting agency. Department level agencies shall exercise appellate
authority over offices, agencies, bureaus, government units, GOCCs and
SUCs under their jurisdiction. Provided, further, that blacklisting decisions of
government agencies that are not subject to general and/or administrative
supervision/control of any department, office or government unit shall be
final and executory.
3.2 Award. A written notice from the procuring entity accepting a bid or
proposal.
3.3 Blacklisting. An administrative penalty disqualifying a person or an entity
from participating in any government procurement for a given period.
3.4 Suspension. An interim289 penalty imposed for infractions committed by a
bidder290 during the procurement291 stage, whereby such bidder292 is
prohibited from further participation in the bidding process of an agency. It
shall remain in effect during the period of motion for reconsideration and/or
appeal and shall terminate only upon final decision by the HoPE or appellate
authority.293
(a)
3.5 Consolidated Blacklisting Report. A report prepared by the GPPB
containing the list of suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, contractors or
consultants blacklisted by procuring entities.
3.6 Contract Implementation. A process of undertaking a project or contract
in accordance with the contract documents.
3.7 Termination of Contract. Extinction of contract by reason of resolution or
rescission under Articles 1191, 1380, 1381 of the Civil Code, Section 68 and
Annex “I” (Guidelines of Termination of Contracts)294 of the IRR295 of R.A.
9184 and other applicable laws arising from the default or unlawful act296 of
the contractor. (a)
3.8 Delist. Removal of a person/entity from the Consolidated Blacklisting
Report.
289 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20
November 2017.
290 Ibid.
291 Ibid.
292 Ibid.
293 Ibid.
294 Ibid.
295 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
296 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2017.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
278
3.9 Blacklisted Person/Entity. A person/entity who was disqualified by an
agency and/or is included in the GPPB Consolidated Blacklisting Report.
3.10 Offense. A violation under Section 69 of RA 9184 and its IRR in one
procurement project wherein the Procuring Entity has already issued a
Blacklisting Order.297
(n)
4.0 SANCTIONS AND GROUNDS FOR BLACKLISTING
4.1 Procurement Stage
During the competitive bidding stage, pursuant to Section 69 of R.A. 9184,
the procuring entity shall impose on bidders or prospective bidders the
penalty of blacklisting298 for one (1) year for the first offense, blacklisting299
for two (2) years for the second offense from participating in the public
bidding process, without prejudice to the imposition of additional
administrative, civil or criminal300 sanctions, as provided by applicable laws,
for the following violations: (a)
a) Submission of eligibility requirements containing false information or
falsified documents.
b) Submission of Bids that contain false information or falsified documents,
or the concealment of such information in the Bids in order to influence
the outcome of eligibility screening or any other stage of the public
bidding.
c) Allowing the use of one’s name,301 or using the name of the name of
another for purpose of public bidding.
d) Withdrawal of a bid, or refusal to accept an award, or enter into
contract with the government without justifiable cause, after he had
been adjudged as having submitted the Lowest Calculated Responsive
Bid or Highest Rated Responsive Bid.
e) Refusal or failure to post the required performance security within the
prescribed time.
f) Refusal to clarify or validate in writing its Bid during post qualification
within a period of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the request
for clarification.
g) Any documented unsolicited attempt by a bidder to unduly influence the
outcome of the bidding in his favor.
h) All other acts that tend to defeat the purpose of the competitive
bidding, such as habitually withdrawing from bidding or submitting late
297 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 November
2017.
298 Ibid.
299 Ibid.
300 Ibid.
301 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
279
bids or patently insufficient bids,302 for at least three (3) times within a
year, except for valid reasons.
In addition to the penalty of blacklisting, the bid security posted by the
concerned bidder or prospective bidder shall also be forfeited. 303
(a)
4.2 Contract Implementation Stage
Pursuant to Section 69 (6) of R.A. 9184 and without prejudice to the
imposition of additional administrative sanctions as the internal rules of the
agency may provide and/or further criminal prosecution as provided by
applicable laws, the procuring entity shall impose on contractors after the
termination of the contract the penalty of blacklisting304 for one (1) year for
the first offense, blacklisting
305 for two (2) years for the second offense from
participating in the public bidding process, for violations committed during the
contract implementation stage, which include but not limited to the following:
(a)
a) Failure of the contractor, due solely to his fault or negligence, to
mobilize and start work or performance within the specified period in
the Notice to Proceed (“NTP”);
b) Failure by the contractor to fully and faithfully comply with its
contractual obligations without valid cause, or failure by the contractor
to comply with any written lawful instruction of the procuring entity or
its representative(s) pursuant to the implementation of the contract.
For the procurement of infrastructure projects or consultancy contracts,
lawful instructions include but are not limited to the following:
i. Employment of competent technical personnel, competent
engineers and/or work supervisors;
ii. Provision of warning signs and barricades in accordance with
approved plans and specifications and contract provisions;
iii. Stockpiling in proper places of all materials and removal from the
project site of waste and excess materials, including broken
pavement and excavated debris in accordance with approved
plans and specifications and contract provisions;
iv. Deployment of committed equipment, facilities, support staff and
manpower; and
v. Renewal of the effectivity dates of the performance security after
its expiration during the course of contract implementation.
c) Assignment and subcontracting of the contract or any part thereof or
substitution of key personnel named in the proposal without prior
written approval by the procuring entity.
302 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
303 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
304 Ibid.
305 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
280
d) For the procurement of goods, unsatisfactory progress in the delivery of
the goods by the manufacturer, supplier or distributor arising from his
fault or negligence and/or unsatisfactory or inferior quality of goods, as
may be provided in the contract;
e) For the procurement of consulting services, poor performance by the
consultant of his services arising from his fault or negligence. Any of
the following acts by the consultant shall be construed as poor
performance:
i. Defective design resulting in substantial corrective works in design
and/or construction;
ii. Failure to deliver critical outputs due to consultant’s fault or
negligence;
iii. Specifying materials which are inappropriate, substandard, or way
above acceptable standards; and306
(a)
iv. Allowing defective workmanship or works by the contractor being
supervised by the consultant.
f) For the procurement of infrastructure projects, poor performance by the
contractor or unsatisfactory quality and/or progress of work arising from
his fault or negligence as reflected in the Constructor's Performance
Evaluation System (“CPES”) rating sheet. In the absence of the CPES
rating sheet, the existing performance monitoring system of the
procuring entity shall be applied. Any of the following acts by the
constructor shall be construed as poor performance:
i. Negative slippage of 15% and above within the critical path of the
project due entirely to the fault or negligence of the contractor;
and
ii. Quality of materials and workmanship not complying with the
approved specifications arising from the contractor's fault or
negligence.
g) Willful or deliberate abandonment or non-performance of the project or
contract by the contractor resulting to substantial breach thereof
without lawful and/or just cause.
h) In case it is determined prima facie that the contractor has engaged,
before or during implementation of the contract, in unlawful deeds and
behaviors relative to contract acquisition and implementation as
enumerated in Section III.D of the Guidelines on Termination of
Contracts.307
(n)
306 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
307 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
281
In addition to the penalty of blacklisting308, the performance security posted
by the contractor shall also be forfeited. (a)
5.0 PROCEDURE FOR BLACKLISTING DURING THE PROCUREMENT STAGE309
(a)
5.1 Initiation of Action
Any bidder/prospective bidder or duly authorized observer may initiate the
blacklisting proceedings by filing a written complaint with the Bids and
Awards Committee (“BAC”). The BAC may also motu proprio (by itself)
commence the proceedings upon prima facie (self-sufficient) determination
that the contractor as a bidder or prospective bidder has committed any of
the grounds for blacklisting during the procurement310 stage. (a)
At the option of the procuring entities, a reasonable fee may be required for
initiating the blacklisting proceedings. (a)
5.2 Notification
Upon verification of the existence of grounds for blacklisting, the BAC shall
immediately notify the contractor concerned in writing, advising him that:
a) a complaint for blacklisting has been filed against him, or he has been
considered by the BAC for blacklisting, stating the grounds for such; (a)
For this purpose, multiple violations in a procurement project as
grounds for blacklisting shall be included in one complaint, which shall
be considered separate offenses, once proven.311
(n)
b) he has the opportunity to show cause why he should not be
blacklisted;(a)
c) a hearing shall be conducted before the BAC, upon his request, where
he may present documentary evidence, verbal testimony and crossexamine the witnesses presented against him; and
d) the consequences of being suspended and blacklisted. (a)
Within five (5) calendar days from receipt of notification, the contractor shall
submit its written answer with documentary evidence to the BAC with a
manifestation for request of hearing to determine questions of fact, if he so
desires. No time extension shall be allowed.
Should the contractor fail to answer within the same period, the BAC shall
issue a resolution recommending to the Head of the Procuring Entity the
immediate suspension312 of the contractor from participating in any bidding
process of the agency and the forfeiture of his bid security. (a)
308 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
309 Ibid.
310 Ibid.
311 Ibid.
312 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
282
5.3 Hearings
If a hearing is requested, the BAC shall immediately set the date and time for
hearing. The hearing shall be non-litigious and shall be terminated within five
(5) days.
The BAC may also invite a representative from a duly recognized private
group in a sector or discipline relevant to the procurement at hand as an
observer for each hearing.
If no request is made, the BAC shall make a determination of the case based
on the complaint, answer, documentary evidence submitted and facts
verified. If the BAC is convinced that the contractor is at fault, it shall issue a
resolution recommending to the head of the agency the suspension313 of the
contractor from participating in any bidding process of the agency and the
forfeiture of his bid security. (a)
5.4 Decision
The Head of the Procuring Entity shall, within fifteen (15) days from receipt
of the resolution and the records of the BAC proceedings, determine whether
reasonable cause exists for the suspension314 of the contractor and the
forfeiture of the latter’s bid security. If the Head of the Procuring Entity
determines that such reasonable cause exists, he shall issue a decision
suspending315 the contractor from participating in any bidding process of the
agency, and further declaring that his bid security is forfeited. Otherwise, he
shall dismiss the case. (a)
The decision shall clearly and distinctly state the facts, evidence and the law
on which it is based, as well as the date of effectivity of the penalty, if any.
The Head of the Procuring Entity may delegate to the BAC the authority to
impose the corresponding sanction(s) provided for in these guidelines.
5.5 Notice of Decision
The Head of the Procuring Entity shall furnish the suspended316 contractor a
copy of the decision immediately from its promulgation. (a)
5.6 Effect of Decision
A contractor is suspended317 upon receipt of the notice of decision prohibiting
him from participating in the bidding process of the agency. The
blacklisting318 shall remain in effect during the period of motion for
reconsideration and appeal319 and shall terminate only upon final320 decision
313 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
314 Ibid.
315 Ibid.
316 Ibid.
317 Ibid.
318 Ibid.
319 Ibid.
320 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
283
by the Head of the Procuring Entity or appellate authority. (a)
If no motion for reconsideration or appeal321 is filed within reglementary
period,322 the decision shall become final and executory. Thereafter, the
Head of Procuring Entity shall issue a Blacklisting Order disqualifying the
erring contractor from participating in the bidding of all government
projects.(a)
The motion for reconsideration and/or appeal must first be resolved before
any Blacklisting Order may be issued.323
(n)
5.7 Motion for Reconsideration
A Motion for Reconsideration may be filed by the suspended person/entity
within three (3) calendar days from receipt of the notice of decision and shall
be for either or both of the following causes, provided that only one (1)
Motion for Reconsideration shall be filed with the blacklisting agency:
a) The decision is not in conformity with the evidence and/or facts
presented; and
b) Newly discovered evidence or facts which not be discovered and
produced at the investigation and which when presented would
probably alter the result of the investigation.
The Head of the Procuring Entity shall resolve with finality the motion for
reconsideration within seven (7) calendar days from the filing thereof and
furnish suspended contractor a copy of the resolution immediately from its
promulgation.
5.8 Appeal324
In the event that the motion for reconsideration is denied, the suspended bidder
may file an appeal, through a Notice of Appeal, with the appellate authority, if
any, within seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the decision denying the
motion for reconsideration, and upon payment of the appeal fee in the same
amount as prescribed for the filing of protest under Section 55.3 of the IRR of
R.A. 9184. The appellate authority shall decide on the appeal within seven (7)
calendar days upon perfection of appeal.325
(n)
5.9 Finality of Decision
The decision of the agency shall become final and executory after the lapse of
seven (7) calendar days from the receipt of the notice of decision or resolution on
the motion for reconsideration. If an appeal326 is filed, the affirmed, modified or
reversed decision shall become final and executory upon receipt thereof by the
agency and person/entity concerned. (a)
321 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
322 Ibid.
323 Ibid.
324 Ibid.
325 Ibid.
326 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
284
Upon finality of the decision blacklisting327 the contractor, the Head of Procuring
Entity or appellate authority shall issue a Blacklisting Order disqualifying the erring
contractor from participating in the bidding of all government projects. (a)
6.0 PROCEDURE FOR BLACKLISTING DURING THE CONTRACT
IMPLEMENTATION STAGE
6.1 Upon termination of contract due to default and/or unlawful acts328 of the
contractor, the Head of the Procuring Entity shall issue within seven (7)
calendar days329 a Blacklisting Order immediately330 disqualifying the erring
contractor from participating in the bidding of all government projects. The
performance security of said contractor shall also be forfeited. (a)
6.2 Where contract termination is no longer possible, but the contractor
committed acts or causes which may constitute ground(s) for blacklisting, the
implementing unit shall, within seven (7) days after the lapse of project
duration, cause the execution of a Verified Report, with all relevant evidence
attached, subject to the following procedures:331
(n)
a) Notice of Blacklisting. Upon recommendation by the
Implementing Unit, the Head of the Procuring Entity shall initiate the
blacklisting procedures by a written notice to the contractor
conveying the following information:332
1. a statement of the acts that constitute the ground(s) for
blacklisting;333
(n)
2. an instruction to the contractor to show cause as to why it
should not be blacklisted; and334
(n)
3. special instructions of the Procuring Entity, if any.335
(n)
The Notice of Blacklisting shall be accompanied by a copy of the
Verified Report.336
(n)
b) Show Cause. Within a period of seven (7) calendar days from
receipt of the Notice of Blacklisting, the contractor shall submit to the
Head of the Procuring Entity a verified position paper stating why it
should not be blacklisted.337
(n)
If the contractor fails to show cause after the lapse of the seven (7)
day period, either by inaction or by default, the Head of the
327 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
328 Ibid.
329 Ibid.
330 Ibid.
331 Ibid.
332 Ibid.
333 Ibid.
334 Ibid.
335 Ibid.
336 Ibid.
337 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
285
Procuring Entity shall issue a Blacklisting Order.338
(n)
c) Decision. Within a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days
from receipt of the verified position paper, the Head of the Procuring
Entity shall decide whether or not to blacklist the contractor. It shall
serve a written notice to the contractor of its decision which shall
become final and executory after the lapse of seven (7) calendar
days from the receipt of the notice of decision. 339
(n)
7.0 STATUS OF BLACKLISTED PERSON/ENTITY
Before the issuance of a Blacklisting Order, the erring contractor may participate in
the procurement of any government project except in the agency where he is
suspended. But if Blacklisting Order is issued prior to the date of the notice of award
(“NOA”), the blacklisted person/entity shall not be qualified for award and such
project/contract shall be awarded to another bidder pursuant to R.A. 9184 and its
IRR.340
If the Blacklisting Order is issued after award of a government project/contract to the
blacklisted person/entity, the awarded project/contract shall not be prejudiced by the
said order: Provided, however, that the said offense(s) committed by the blacklisted
person/entity is/are not connected with the awarded project/contract.
The effectivity period for the penalty of one (1) or two (2) years, as the case may be,
shall be clearly specified in the Blacklisting Order, the commencement of which, shall
be the same date as the issuance of the Blacklisting Order. 341
(n)
8.0 APPLICATION OF PENALTY
In case the penalty of blacklisting for two (2) years is imposed during the pendency
of a previous blacklisting order, the latter shall be deemed terminated and subsumed
in the two (2)-year blacklisting.342
(n)
If an offense is committed for the third time or oftener, the penalty applicable shall
still be blacklisting for two (2) years.343
(n)
9.0 DELISTING
A blacklisted person/entity shall be automatically delisted after the period for the
penalty shall have elapsed. (a)
10.0 METHODOLOGY FOR NOTIFICATION TO THE GPPB
10.1. Blacklisting Orders duly approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity or
Appellate Authority, shall contain the following information:344
338 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
339 Ibid.
340 As amended by GPPB Resolution 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
341 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August
2018.
342 Ibid.
343 Ibid.
344 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 14-2020, dated 25 June 2020, published in the Philippine Star on23 July 2020.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
286
a) Department/Office Order or Board Resolution number;
b) Complete registered business name, address and PhilGEPS
registration number of the blacklisted person/entity;
c) License number, if applicable;
d) Authorized Managing Officer (“AMO”)
e) Name of project/contract and location amount;
f) Specific ground(s)/offense(s) committed;
g) Sanction’s imposed and its specific duration, that is, “start” date
and “end” date; and
h) Date of issuance of the order to blacklist.
10.2 The Procuring Entity through its official or alternate user shall post the
Blacklisting Order in the Online Blacklisting Portal within three(3)
calendar days from the date of its effectivity.345
10.3 A Blacklisted Entity shall automatically be delisted from the Consolidated
Blacklisting Report after the lapse of the period of penalty imposed. The
Procuring Entity shall not be allowed to delist a Blacklisted Entity from
the Consolidated Blacklisting Report for reasons other than the lapse of
the one (1) year or two (2) years period of suspension, as the case may
be.
On the other hand, the Procuring Entity, through its official or alternate
user, shall immediately remove the name of Blacklisted Entity upon
receipt of a lawful order from a judicial or quasi-judicial body directing it
to temporarily or permanently lift the period of suspension or remove
the name of a Blacklisted Entity from the Consolidated Blacklisting
Report.346
10.4 A Blacklisted Entity which was delisted from the Consolidated Blacklisting
Report or whose period of suspension was permanently lifted or which
has been permanently removed from the Consolidated Blacklisting
Report pursuant to a lawful order shall be qualified to participate in all
government procurement upon the lapse of the period of suspension or
effectivity of the order, as the case may be, without further clearance
from the Procuring Entity that issued the Blacklisting Order.
On the other hand, in case the period of suspension of a Blacklisted
Entity was temporarily lifted or its name was temporarily removed from
the Consolidated Blacklisting Report pursuant to a lawful order, the
Blacklisted Entity shall only be qualified to participate in all government
procurement during the period of the temporary lifting or removal as
stated in the said order, without further clearance from the Procuring
Entity that issued the Blacklisting Order.347
10.5 The Procuring Entity’s official or alternate user shall immediately repost
the name of a Blacklisted Entity in the Consolidated Blacklisting Report
upon the lapse of the order temporarily lifting the period of suspension
or removing the name of a Blacklisted Entity in the Consolidated
345 Ibid.
346 Ibid.
347 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
287
Blacklisting Report.
The period of suspension imposed upon the Blacklisted Entity shall not
be diminished by an order temporarily lifting the period of suspension or
removing a Blacklisted Entity from the Consolidated Blacklisting Report.
Upon reposting, the PE’s official or alternate user shall adjust the period
of suspension by adding the number of days the suspension of the
Blacklisted Entity was temporarily lifted or its name was removed from
the Consolidated Blacklisting Report in order to fully serve the one (1)
year or two (2) years penalty, as the case may be.348
10.2 The Consolidated Blacklisting Report shall be generated and updated
real-time by the posting and updating made in the Online Blacklisting
Portal. The following information shall be available in the Consolidated
Blacklisting Report, which can be accessed by any interested party
through
https://www.gppb.gov.ph/ConsolidatedBlacklistingReport.php:
349
a. List of permanently Blacklisted Entities:
b. List of Blacklisted Entities with the corresponding period of
blacklisting; and
c. List of temporarily removed Blacklisted Entities with the
corresponding period in compliance with a lawful order issued by a
judicial or quasi-judicial body.
10.7 The Online Blacklisting Portal shall automatically notify the Procuring
Entity through its BAC Chairperson, GPPB-TSO, and PhilGEPS of the
posting and updating made by the Procuring Entity’s official or alternate
user. The notice shall be the basis of the PhilGEPS in denying the
registration of, or excluding from the Government of the Philippines–
Online Merchant Registry (GoP-OMR) the account of the Blacklisted
Entity pursuant to Section 5.6 of Resolution No. 12-2012 or the
Guidelines for the Use of the GOP-OMR.350
10.8 The ministerial authority of the GPPB and its TSO is limited to
maintenance and updating of the Online Blacklisting Portal. The
Blacklisting Order posted by the Procuring Entity carries with it the
presumption that the provisions of the Blacklisting Guidelines and the
Contract Termination Guidelines, as the case may be, were duly
complied with and that due process was afforded to the Blacklisted
Entity.
Non-posting of the Blacklisting Order or the non-inclusion of the name of
the Blacklisted Entity in the GPPB Consolidated Blacklisting Report does
not affect the status of the Blacklisted Entity in as much as the operative
act of the blacklisting is the issuance of the Blacklisting Order by the
Procuring Entity concerned, and not the posting in the Online Blacklisting
Portal.351
(n)
348 Ibid.
349 Ibid.
350 Ibid.
351 Ibid.
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting Appendix 17
288
10. 9 In the case of procurement of infrastructure projects, should the
Procuring Entity decide to refer the case of its Blacklisted Entity to the
Philippine Contractors Accreditation Board (“PCAB”) for license
suspension/revocation, it shall submit to PCAB a copy of the decision
accompanied by supporting documents.
11.0 AMENDMENTS
11.1 In the implementation of these guidelines, the GPPB may introduce
modifications thereto through the amendment of its specific provisions as
the need arises.
11.2 Any amendment to these guidelines shall be applicable to government
projects advertised for bid after the effectivity of the said amendment
12.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines or any amendments thereof shall take effect immediately after
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general nationwide circulation
and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified
copies of these guidelines.352
352 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 09-2004, dated 20 August 2004, and published in the Official Gazette on 30
November2004.
Guidelines for Legal Assistance of BAC Members and its
Supporting Staff
Appendix 18
289
APPENDIX 18
GUIDELINES FOR LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF BIDS AND
AWARDS COMMITTEE (BAC) MEMBERS AND ITS SUPPORT STAFF
1.0 SCOPE
These guidelines shall govern the indemnification package for public officials
providing services in and for the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) pursuant to and
in accordance with Section 73 of Republic Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184), otherwise
known as “Government Procurement Reform Act” and its Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR).353
These guidelines shall apply to all branches, agencies, departments, bureaus, offices
and instrumentalities of the Government, including Government-Owned and/or
Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), Government Financial Institutions (GFIs), State
Universities and Colleges (SUCs), and Local Government Units (LGUs).
2.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to meet the following objectives:
2.1. To prescribe the rules and procedures in granting legal assistance and
indemnification to the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) members and BAC
Support Staff.
2.2. To ensure that the mandate to insulate government procurement personnel
from the unnecessary loss, damage or injury arising from the lawful exercise
of their functions is implemented in accordance with the provisions of R.A.
9184.
2.3. To establish the legal parameters for the effective implementation of the legal
assistance and indemnification provided for BAC members and BAC Support
Staff.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1. BAC. Refers to the Bids and Awards Committee as defined and established in
accordance with Rule V of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)354
of RA 9184.
3.2. BAC members. Refer to the regular and provisional members of the BAC
determined accordance with Rule V of the IRR.355
3.3. Indemnification. Refers to the assistance or remuneration given to the
members of the BAC and/or the BAC Support Staff for any loss, damage, or
injury caused to them by reason of the lawful performance of their duty.
353 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
354 Ibid.
355 Ibid.
Guidelines for Legal Assistance of BAC Members and its
Supporting Staff
Appendix 18
290
3.4. Private Legal Assistance. Refers to the services of a private lawyer or
external counsel engaged by or in behalf of the members of the BAC and/or
the BAC Support Staff resulting from the filing against him of any criminal or
civil action or proceeding for acts made in connection with the lawful
performance of his functions.
3.5. Liability insurance. Refers to the insurance policy purchased and
maintained by the procuring entity in favor of a member of the BAC and/or
the BAC Support Staff against any liability asserted against or incurred by the
person in any such capacity or arising out of the person’s status as such.
3.6. Medical Assistance. The remuneration given by the procuring entity for any
injury or disability incurred by members of the BAC and/or the BAC Support
Staff in the lawful performance of their official functions and duties. For this
purpose, “injury” means any bodily impairment arising from and in the course
of procurement-related activities.
3.7. BAC Support Staff. Refers to the members of the BAC Secretariat and the
Technical Working Group duly designated by the procuring entity pursuant to
the provisions of Rule V of the IRR356 of RA 9184.
4.0 GENERAL CONDITIONS
4.1. Free Legal Assistance
1. The procuring entity shall, to the fullest extent permitted by these
guidelines, indemnify a BAC member and/or any of the BAC Support
Staff who was or is a party to a pending or completed action, suit or
proceeding whether civil, criminal or administrative in nature brought
against him in the performance of his official functions as BAC member
or as BAC Support Staff.
2. The BAC member or BAC Support Staff concerned must have engaged
the services of a private lawyer or external counsel.
3. The BAC member or BAC Support Staff must have not been adjudged as
guilty of gross negligence, misconduct, or grave abuse of discretion.
4. The free legal assistance shall cover actual cost of suit and attorney’s
fees. The attorney representing the BAC member or BAC Support Staff
shall be entitled to a maximum of Five Thousand Pesos (₱ 5,000.00) per
appearance which shall be paid by the procuring entity.
5. The free legal assistance shall not cover:
a) any action or suit initiated by a BAC member or BAC Support Staff
in his personal capacity or in behalf of the procuring entity, unless
such action, proceeding, or claim was authorized by the head of
the procuring entity or the approving authority therein; or
356 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines for Legal Assistance of BAC Members and its
Supporting Staff
Appendix 18
291
b) any action or suit initiated by the Government against the BAC
member or BAC Support Staff.
6. The BAC member or BAC Support Staff shall be entitled to actual, moral,
and exemplary damages when awarded by the court. Likewise, the
attorney representing the BAC member or BAC Support Staff shall be
entitled to attorney’s fees awarded by the court.
4.2. Liability Insurance
1. The procuring entity shall have the responsibility to procure and
maintain adequate liability insurance for and in behalf of its BAC
members or BAC Support Staff.
2. The liability insurance policy shall cover only those liabilities asserted
against the public official and incurred by him in his capacity as such
BAC members or BAC Support Staff as the case may be.
3. The insurer shall pay for the loss arising from the claim or suit made
against the BAC members or BAC Support Staff during the policy period
wherein they serve in such capacity.
4. For purposes of this issuance, the term “loss” shall include judgments,
expenses for settlement or compromise, as well as all reasonable fees
and other expenses incurred by such persons in connection with any
administrative, civil, or criminal action, suit or proceeding to which they
may be or have been made a party by reason of the lawful performance
of their official functions and duties in such capacity.
5. Provided further, that, such BAC members or BAC Support Staff shall
not be adjudged in such action or proceeding to be guilty of gross
negligence, misconduct, or grave abuse of discretion or guilty of any
other complaint or charges.
6. In the event of settlement or compromise, indemnification shall be
confined only to matters covered by the settlement, and to which the
procuring entity had been advised by counsel that the person to be
indemnified have not committed gross negligence, misconduct, or grave
abuse of discretion in the performance of their duties and functions.
7. The procurement of liability insurance shall be subject to the setting of
schedule of premium by the GPPB.
4.3. Medical Assistance
1. Medical assistance shall be provided to BAC members and BAC Support
Staff for Injuries/disabilities incurred in the lawful performance of their
official functions and duties.
2. The claimant(s) shall be entitled to indemnification for any injury or
disability resulting from the performance of their official functions as
defined by law and without any contributory negligence on their part.
Guidelines for Legal Assistance of BAC Members and its
Supporting Staff
Appendix 18
292
Provided further, that they exercised due diligence to prevent harm or
injury to themselves.
3. The claimant or his/her relatives must notify the head of the procuring
entity within seven (7) calendar days from the occurrence of the injury
or disability.
4. The medical assistance herein provided shall consist of indemnification
for medicines, laboratory and hospitalization expenses, provided that
the amount claimed shall not exceed the actual amount incurred,
substantiated by receipts and other supporting documents.
5. Indemnification shall only be made upon presentation of the proof of
payment in connection with the injury or disability suffered.
6. The medical assistance granted herein shall be granted to the claimant
as a matter of right and subject to the conditions mandated by law.
5.0 PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
OF BAC MEMBERS
5.1. The claimant(s) shall file their respective claim(s) for legal assistance, liability
insurance, or medical assistance as the case may be, with the head of the
procuring entity; and shall secure the approval of the latter on the terms and
conditions of the engagement of counsel.
5.2. The head of the procuring entity shall be given at least fifteen (15) to thirty
(30) calendar days to examine, review, verify and validate the authenticity of
the documents presented by the claimant.
5.3. Upon finding that all the requirements have been duly complied with and that
all the necessary documents submitted are genuine, it shall then order the
processing of the claims and the subsequent release of funds for the
approved claims.
5.4. Any expenses incurred in advance by the claimant arising from the
performance of his official functions in such capacity shall be subject to
reimbursement upon submission of the necessary documents and approval
thereof by the head of the procuring entity.
5.5. If the BAC member or its support staff is found to be not guilty for gross
negligence, misconduct, or grave abuse of discretion, he shall liquidate his
cash advances by presenting receipts of payment and other necessary
documents mentioned in Item 5.2. On the other hand, if the BAC member or
its support staff is found to be guilty for gross negligence, misconduct, or
grave abuse of discretion, he shall pay the cash advances made through
salary deductions or reimbursement.
6.0 FUNDING SOURCE
The funds to be used for the grant of the free legal assistance, liability insurance or
medical assistance shall be taken from the agency’s annual appropriation.
Guidelines for Legal Assistance of BAC Members and its
Supporting Staff
Appendix 18
293
Protest fees, proceeds from the sale of bidding documents, and any other additional
funds derived from other income-generating activities of the agency may be used to
augment the funding source provided in this section.
7.0 AMENDMENTS
In the implementation of these guidelines, the GPPB may introduce modifications
thereto through the amendment of its specific provisions as the need arises.
8.0 EFFECTIVITY
These guidelines or any amendments thereof shall take effect within fifteen (15)
days after publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general nationwide
circulation and upon filing with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three
(3) certified copies of these guidelines.357
357 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 021-2005, dated 07 October 2005, and published in the Official Gazette on 09
January 2006.
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
294
APPENDIX 19
REVISED GUIDELINES ON RECOGNITION OF UMBRELLA ORGANIZATION OF
CONSULTANTS
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
Under Annex “B” of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act
9184 (RA 9184), the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) is directed to
recognize an Umbrella Organization of Consultants composing of various
organizations of consultants and individual consultants in the Philippines that may be
engaged by the Government on matters relating to consulting services.
The policy direction, therefore, is to encourage and foster the development of an
umbrella organization that covers a wider range of professions and disciplines. In
furtherance of this policy, the GPPB shall recognize for each identified major sectors
of the consulting industry a UOC to perform the duties and responsibilities herein
provided.
2.0 PURPOSE
The Guidelines for Recognition of Umbrella Organization of Consultants (the
“Guidelines”) shall set forth the criteria in and procedure for determining the UOCs to
be recognized and their corresponding duties and responsibilities.
3.0 GUIDING PRINCIPLES
3.1. The GPPB shall recognize the UOC that best represents consultants who
belong to a major sector of the consulting industry listed under Annex “A”
hereof, which shall be updated by the GPPB whenever necessary.
3.2. The criteria shall focus on the ability and capacity of a UOC to meet the
following:
a) Cover a wider range of professions and disciplines which comprise a
major sector identified under Annex “A” hereof;
b) Accredit its members on the types of services in the profession or
discipline falling under its recognized sub-sector/s where the members
are technically and financially qualified to offer their services;
c) Maintain an updated list of accredited member individual consultants
and/or associations;
d) Self-police its members for the development of the consulting
industry;
e) Develop a continuing capacity development program for its members;
f) Join the government in its advocacy against graft and corruption; and
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
295
g) Assist the Philippine consulting industry, in general, and the Filipino
consultants, in particular, to develop into world class consultants that
can compete in the international market.
4.0 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF UMBRELLA ORGANIZATION OF
CONSULTANTS
4.1. A recognized UOC shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
a) Registration and accreditation of member consultants based on types
of services in the profession or discipline falling under its recognized subsector/s where the members are technically and financially qualified to
offer their services;
b) Preparation and certification of a list of fields and expertise in such
fields available and the names of the accredited local consultants
which shall be updated semi-annually or as often as necessary, and
disseminated to concerned procuring entities;
c) Implementation of a continuing capacity development program for its
member consultants, including, but not limited to,
trainings/seminars/workshops on government procurement;
d) Regulation/Policing of its members for the development of the
consulting industry which will include the establishment of a grievance
mechanism for its members;
e) Submission of the updated list of accredited member consultants to the
GPPB monthly and posting of the list at the appropriate website identified
by the GPPB;
f) Immediately notify the GPPB whenever there are changes within the
organizational set-up of the UOC which includes, but not limited to,
amendments to articles of incorporation and by-laws, replacement of
UOC’s liaison officer;
g) Technical assistance to the GPPB in matters relating to the consulting
industry, including assistance in identifying blacklisted consultants;
h) Assignment of observers to requesting procuring entities for
procurement activities related to its profession;
i) Take measures that will help ensure the maintenance of standards on
the conduct of the activities they undertake, according to its duties and
responsibilities as specified herein; and
j) Supervision of the performance and compliance of its members as regards
their obligations to procuring entities.
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
296
5.0 EVALUATION CRITERIA AND DOCUMENTARY REQUIREMENTS
5.1. An umbrella organization requesting recognition shall be evaluated by the
GPPB using the following criteria:
5.1.1. The Organization and its Coverage (15%)
5.1.1.1. The organization must be established and created in
accordance with the laws of the Philippines.
5.1.1.2. The organization must represent a major sector of the
consulting industry identified in Annex “A” hereof.
5.1.1.3. The profile, vision, mission, and objectives of the
organization must be consistent with its role, duties and
responsibilities as a UOC.
5.1.1.4. The organization must be composed of individual
consultants and/or associations, involved in various types
of services related to the profession and/or discipline
comprising a major sector of a consulting industry
identified in Annex “A” hereof.
5.1.1.5. In satisfaction of this criterion, the organization shall
submit the following documents to the GPPB:
a) Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) registration
certificate or other documents showing existence of
juridical personality;
b) Articles of Incorporation, By-Laws, and any
amendments thereto reflecting its primary and
secondary purposes;
c) Any other document stating the office location and
contact number, profile, vision, mission, and objectives
of the organization;
d) List of registered members, whether individuals or
associations, with their contact numbers and
addresses, as well as the corresponding professions
and/or disciplines they cover, and their respective track
record; and
e) Commitment by said organization to cooperate with
and actively participate in the development of one
umbrella organization of consultants that will
encompass all professions and disciplines that may be
the subject of government consultancy contracts.
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
297
5.1.2. Accreditation Process (30%)
5.1.2.1. The organization must show its ability to properly screen
the applicants for membership by prescribing a standard
accreditation system.
5.1.2.2. The accreditation system must conform to and promote the
goals and objectives of this Guidelines.
5.1.2.3. The organization must demonstrate its capability to oversee
the performance of its members, through adoption of
mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of the members,
and creation of an accreditation board/committee.
5.1.2.4. For this criterion, the organization shall submit the following
documents:
a) The organization shall submit its accreditation
guidelines and other relevant documents that describe
in detail its registration and accreditation system for
both individual consultants and associations; and
b) The organization shall also submit the composition of
accreditation board/committee in charge of the
evaluation of members.
5.1.3. Capacity Building Program (25%)
5.1.3.1. The organization shall see to it that its members are
equipped with adequate skill and expertise relevant to the
type of sector of consulting industry the organization
belongs.
5.1.3.2. The organization must institute programs which aim to
develop the skill or competence of its members, or for
overall upgrading of the members’ performance ability.
5.1.3.3. In satisfaction of this criterion, the organization shall
submit the program/s to be adopted by the organization
for capacity building of its member organizations and
individual consultants.
5.1.4. Regulation/ Policing Process (25%)
5.1.4.1. The organization adopts a regulation/policing scheme which
is geared towards monitoring the adherence to the set of
rules promulgated by the organization for its members.
5.1.4.2. The organization shall act as the regulatory body of all its
members, and as such, it should formulate mechanisms for
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
298
dispute resolution in case of conflict among its members.
5.1.4.3. The organization must establish its capability to enforce
compliance of its rules upon its members.
5.1.4.4. In satisfaction of this criterion, the organization shall
submit the following documents to the GPPB:
a) The guidelines reflecting the procedure on
regulation/policing by the organization of its members,
including sanctions for erring members; and
b) Proposed mechanism for dispute resolution of its
members.
5.1.5. Liaison (5%)
5.1.5.1. The organization must maintain active liaison with the
GPPB, the relevant government agency, and various
Bids and Awards Committees (BACs), as may be required
by the GPPB.
5.1.5.2. In satisfaction of this criterion, the organization shall
submit the following documents to the GPPB:
a) The position and name of its officers or employees who
are in charge of liaising with the GPPB and other
government agencies; and
b) The addresses and contact details of the abovementioned officers and employees.
5.2. The organization must obtain a minimum evaluation rating of at least
seventy-five percent (75%) to be recognized as a UOC.
6.0 APPLICATION FOR RECOGNITION
Recognition of a UOC shall be done by the GPPB under the following procedure:
6.1. The applicant-organization shall accomplish the application form prescribed
by the Government Procurement Policy Board – Technical Support Office
(GPPB-TSO) and submit the same to the latter including the original or
certified true copies of the documents required under Section 5.
6.2. The applicant-organization shall cause the publication of its duly
accomplished application form, stamped “received” by the GPPB-TSO, at least
once in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and post the same in
PhilGEPS website for a period of fifteen (15) calendar days.
6.3. Questions and/or oppositions on the recognition of the applicant-organization
shall be submitted to the GPPB-TSO not later than fifteen (15) calendar days
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
299
from the date of publication or last day of posting, whichever is later, as
mentioned in the immediately preceding paragraph.
6.4. The documents submitted by the applicant-organization and the oppositions
thereto, if any, shall be evaluated by the GPPB in order to determine the
capacity of the applicant-organization to perform the duties and
responsibilities of a UOC based on the given criteria for evaluation.
6.5. If the GPPB finds the organization qualified to be a UOC, it will declare such
organization as the recognized UOC for the major sector listed in Annex “A”
hereof, and will issue a Certificate of Recognition.
6.6. Whenever the GPPB finds that the application of the applicant-organization is
insufficient to warrant recognition, the GPPB shall re-evaluate the application
upon compliance by the applicant-organization of its order to revise the
application and/or to submit additional documents.
7.0 PERIOD OF RECOGNITION
7.1. The recognition of UOC shall be valid for two (2) years after the issuance of
the Certificate of Recognition, unless sooner revoked for a cause.
7.2. The GPPB shall conduct an annual review of the over-all performance of the
UOC. It may also conduct random inspection of the activities of the UOC, as
it deems necessary.
7.3. No challenge of the UOC’s recognition shall be entertained for the duration
of its validity.
7.4. After due process, the GPPB may, motu proprio or upon a valid complaint
filed by any interested party, suspend or revoke the recognition of a UOC
for failure to perform its duties and responsibilities as prescribed herein.
7.5. Any other sanctions the GPPB may deem to impose in the future shall be, at
all instances, proportionate to the offense committed by the UOC.
8.0 REPEALING CLAUSE
The GPPB Guidelines for Recognition of Umbrella Organization of Consultants
approved and adopted through GPPB Resolution 14-2004 is hereby repealed.
9.0 EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE
This shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the University of
the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies.358
358 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 02-2011, dated 28 January 2011 and published in The Daily Tribune on 21 March 2011.
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
300
ANNEX A
List of Major Sectors of the Philippine Consulting Industry
1. Agriculture pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Agricultural development
b) Agricultural production, agro processing and agro business
c) Agricultural sector development
d) Fishery and livestock
2. Disaster pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Disaster Management
b) Risk Reduction
c) Geophysical Hazards
3. Education pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Basic education
b) Education sector development
c) Non-formal education
d) Senior Secondary General Education
e) Technical education, vocational training, and skills development
f) Tertiary education
4. Energy pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Conventional energy (Fossil Fuels) exploration, development, production,
utilization and distribution such as: Coal, Gas and Oil.
b) Non-Conventional Energy (Renewable Energy) exploration, development,
production, utilization and distribution such as: Wind, Solar, Hydro,
Geothermal, Ocean, Biomass and Alternative Fuels.
c) Electricity Power development, production, transmission and distribution
d) Energy Efficiency, Conservation and development.
5. Environment pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Environment and biodiversity
b) Forestry
c) Geosciences
d) Land management
e) Mining and mineral resources
f) Waste management
g) Water resources management
h) Water supply and sanitation
6. Finance pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Banking system
b) Business and other services
c) Capital markets and funds
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
301
d) Finance sector development and reforms
e) Housing finance
f) Micro finance
g) Pension, insurance, social security and savings
h) Public finance and expense management
7. Health and Social Welfare pertains, but is not limited, to the following
sectors/services:
a) Early childhood development
b) Health and social services attached to wider programs
c) Health program
d) Nutrition
e) Social protection
8. Information and Communications Technology pertains, but is not limited, to the
following sectors/services:
a) Hardware which includes: Processing and Storage, Communications, and Data
Center Management
b) Software which includes: Applications, Databases, Information Security,
Network, and Web Development/E-Commerce
c) ICT Management which includes: Strategic Planning, Project Management,
Resource/Capacity Planning and Management, Systems Audit,
Virtualization/Cloud Computing, Business Process, Change Management, Risk
Management/Business Continuity, and Systems Administration
9. Infrastructure pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Architecture
b) Construction supervision
c) Engineering
d) Irrigation and drainage
e) Transportation systems and facilities
f) Value engineering
g) Vertical structures
10. Labor and Employment pertains, but is not limited, to the following
sectors/services:
a) Manpower Development
b) Working Conditions
c) Occupational Safety and Hazards
d) Wage Classification
11. Law pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Contract review and drafting
b) Disputes settlement
c) Legal management
d) Legal representation
Revised Guidelines on Recognition of Umbrella Organization of
Consultants
Appendix 19
302
e) Legislative liaison
12. Management pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Economic management
b) Government and civil society
c) National government administration
d) Sub-national government administration
e) Support to NGOs
13. Sociology pertains, but is not limited, to the following sectors/services:
a) Community Development
b) Community Resettlement
14. Other Sectors as may be recognized by the GPPB such as, but not limited to, the
following sectors/services:
a) Civil aviation
b) Military
c) Multimodal transport and sector development
d) Tourism
e) Transport and storage
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
303
APPENDIX 20
GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT OF PRINTING SERVICES
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
1.1. Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the General Appropriations Act359
,
procuring entities have the option to engage the services of private printers for
their printing and publication expenditures, subject to public bidding in
accordance with RA 9184 and pertinent accounting and auditing rules and
regulations.
1.2. However, printing of Accountable Forms and Sensitive High Quality/Volume
Requirements shall only be undertaken by the recognized government printers,
namely: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, National Printing Office, and APO Production
Unit, Inc.
2.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
2.1. These guidelines shall govern the procurement of printing services for
accountable forms by the national government, its branches, constitutional
offices, departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities, including
state universities and colleges, government owned/controlled corporations,
government financial institutions, and local government units.
2.2. It shall not apply to official ballots and election paraphernalia, including
statement of votes, certificates of canvass, and paper seals, which is covered by
Section 184 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881, otherwise known as the Omnibus
Election Code of the Philippines and Section 13 of RA 9369.
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
For the purpose of these guidelines, the following terms shall have the corresponding
meanings:
a. Accountable Forms. Refer to forms that are individually identified, accounted
for, and afforded appropriate security. The list of accountable forms shall be
provided in Annex A hereof.
b. Recognized Government Printers (RGPs). Refer to the printers
acknowledged by the government to undertake the printing of accountable forms
for other government agencies as provided for under Section 29 of RA 9970,
namely, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, National Printing Office, and APO Production
Unit, Inc.
c. Sensitive High Quality/Volume Requirements. Refer to printing
requirements that are sensitive and of high quality or high volume determined as
such by the procuring entity.
359 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 04-2011, dated 25 February 2011, published in the Manila Times on 13 June 2011.
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
304
4.0 PROCEDURE
4.1. The procuring entity shall determine whether a printing expenditure is for an
Accountable Form or for a Sensitive High Quality/Volume document.
4.2. The procuring entity shall prepare the technical specifications for the Accountable
Forms or Sensitive High Quality/Volume printing requirement, which shall include,
among others, the prescribed security features, output quantity, and target
completion time.
4.3. It shall then conduct a market analysis to determine the Approved Budget for the
Contract (ABC) taking into consideration the prevailing standard cost for its
printing requirements.
4.3.1. The procuring entity may seek the assistance of the PCOO in
determining whether no RGP is capable of undertaking the printing
service.
4.3.2. Upon determination by the PCOO that no RGP can undertake the
printing service due to time constraints and equipment limitations, the
procuring entity may engage the services of private printers.
4.4. Thereafter, the procuring entity shall send a Request for Quotation (RFQ) to the
RGPs. The quotations received will be evaluated by the procuring entity to
determine which among the RGPs is most capable in performing the printing
service in the most advantageous terms for the procuring entity.
4.4.1. In case the offer submitted by an RGP exceeds the ABC set by the
procuring entity, it may request the Presidential Communications
Operations Office (PCOO) to determine (i) whether the offer of the RGP
is excessive; and (ii) set the appropriate rate for such transaction.
4.5. The procuring entity shall then engage the services of the appropriate RGP
through an Agency-to-Agency Agreement pursuant to Section 53.5 of the IRR of
RA 9184.
4.6. The appropriate RGP engaged by the procuring entity shall directly undertake the
printing services for the contracts entered into, and cannot engage, subcontract,
or assign any private printer to undertake the performance of the printing
service.
5.0 EFFECTIVITY
5.1. These guidelines shall take effect immediately upon publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.360
360 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 05-2010, dated 29 October 2010, published in the Philippine Star on 08 January 2011.
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
305
ANNEX A
A. Accountable forms identified by the recognized government printers.
1. Official Receipt with RP Seal (water mark)
2. Carbonless Official Receipt
3. Official Receipt with RP Seal
4. Certificate of Record of Transfer of Large Cattle
5. Certificate of Ownership of Large Cattle
6. Marriage License
7. Birth Certificate
8. Death Certificate
9. Cash Ticket P0.25
10. Cash Ticket P0.50
11. Cash Ticket P1.00
12. Cash Ticket P5.00
13. Cash Ticket P10.00
14. Real Property Tax Receipt
15. Slaughter Permit and Fee Receipts
16. City / Municipal Burial Permit and Fee Receipt
17. General Journal
18. Cash Receipts Journal
19. Cash Journal
20. Check Disbursements Journal
21. Cash Disbursements Journal
22. General Ledger
23. Subsidiary Ledger
24. Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Card
25. Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Card – Specific Item
26. Supplies Ledger Card
27. Construction in Progress Ledger Card
28. Investments Ledger Card
29. Registry of Appropriations and Allotments
30. Registry of Allotments and Obligations Capital Outlay (RAOCO)
31. Registry of Allotments and Obligations Maintenance and Other Operating
Expenses (RAOMO)
32. Registry of Allotments and Obligations Personal Services (PS)
33. Registry of Allotments and Obligations Financial Expenses (RAOFE)
34. Registry of Allotments and Notice of Cash Allocation
35. Registry of Public Infrastructures – Specific Project
36. Registry of Public Infrastructures – Summary
37. Registry of Reforestation Projects
38. Registry of Dormant Accounts
39. Registry of Accounts Written-Off
40. Registry of Loan Availments and Repayments - Foreign Individual
41. Registry of Loan Availments and Repayments - Foreign Summary
42. Registry of Loan Availments and Repayments - Domestic Individual
43. Registry of Loan Availments and Repayments - Domestic Summary
44. Registry of Grant Availments and Utilization - Foreign Individual Donor
45. Registry of Grant Availments and Utilization - Foreign Summary
46. Registry of Grants Availments and Utilization - Domestic Individual Donor
47. Registry of Grants Availments and Utilization - Domestic Summary
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
306
48. Registry of Guaranteed Loans – Domestic
49. Registry of Guaranteed Loans – Foreign
50. Cash Receipts Record
51. Check Disbursements Record
52. Cash Disbursement Record
53. Stock Card
54. Property Card
55. Drug/s Prescriptions
56. Journal Entry Voucher
57. Allotment and Obligation Slip
58. Order of Payment
59. Disbursement Voucher
60. Petty Cash Voucher
61. General Payroll
62. Itinerary of Travel
63. Payroll Payment Slip
64. Index of Payments
65. Supplies Availability Inquiry
66. Requisition and Issue Slip
67. Purchase Request
68. Purchase Order
69. Acknowledgment Receipt for Equipment
70. Report of Collections and Deposits
71. Reports of Checks Issued
72. Report of Disbursements
73. Petty Cash Replenishment Report
74. Liquidation Report
75. Report of Supplies and Materials issued
76. Waste Materials Report
77. Inventory and Inspection
78. Report of Unserviceable Property
79. Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment
80. Inspection and Acceptance Report
81. Report of Accountability for Accountable Forms
82. Work, Other Animals and Breeding Stocks Ledger Card
83. Supplies Availability Inquiry
84. Abstract of Real Property Tax Collections
85. Community Tax Receipts / Certificates
86. Memorandum Receipt for Equipment, Semi-Expandable and Non-Expandable
Property
87. Livestock Ledger Card (New Form)
88. Daily Statement of Collection and Accountable Form
89. Bill of Lading
90. Invoice and Receipt for Transfer
91. Abstract of Receipt and Account Current
92. Power of Attorney
93. Bond of Indemnity. For Issue of Due Warrant
94. Quarterly Report of Cash Balance of Disbursing officer
95. Reimbursement Receipt
96. Abstract of Sub-Vouchers
97. Invoice and Receipt of Accountable Forms
98. Supplies adjustment Sheet – Wide
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
307
99. Supplies Adjustment Sheet – Narrow
100. Supplies Adjustment Sheet – Small
101. Official Cash Book – Large
102. Official Cash Book – Small
103. Official Cash Book – Pocket Size
104. Request for Bonding Officials and Employees
105. Monthly Statement of Monthly Subsidiary Ledger Balance
106. L/L Bdr. / Sec. P&K A.F. 79
107. Inventory Tag Card
108. Certificate of Discharge from Prison
109. Account Current of Accountable Forms
110. Cover for Provincial Form No. 140/RPA Forms
111. Bolts for Real Property Forms
112. Summary of Collections
113. Abstract of Deposits and Trust Funds
114. Time Card for Bundy Clock
115. Treasurer’s Journal of Coll’n./Dep.
116. Treasurer’s Journal of Cash Disbursement
117. Treasurer’s Journal of Cash Issued
118. Treasurer’s Journal of Bills Rendered
119. Declaration of Real Properties-White, Front and Back
120. Declaration of Real Properties-Copies, Front and Back (1-Blue)
121. Declaration of Real Properties-Copies, Front and Back (1-Canary)
122. Declaration of Real Properties-One Side
123. Real Property Field Appraisal & Assessment Sheet, Land, Plants, & Trees
124. Real Property Field Appraisal & Assessment Sheet, Building
125. Real Property Field Appraisal & Assessment Sheet, Machinery
126. Assessment Roll
127. Journal of assessment Transaction
128. Ownership Record Form
129. Property Record Card
130. Municipal Treasurer’s Account Book
131. Register of Marriage
132. Register of Birth
133. Register of Death
134. Director’s Minute Book
135. Personal Appearance
136. Affidavit of Official Priest or Minister
137. Sworn Statement Advice Parent Ask
138. Comparative Statement of Market/Slaughter
139. Application of Marriage License
140. ID Certificate of Marriage License
141. Consent of Marriage
142. Notice of Re-applicants
143. Marriage Contract
144. Register of Application Marriage License
145. Certificate of Birth
146. Certificate of Death
147. Certificate of Fetal Death
148. Municipal Treasurer’s Journal of Collection and Deposit
149. Certificate of Foundling
150. Register of Foundling
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
308
151. Register of Court Decree/Order
152. Register of Legal Instrument
153. Application for Vacation Leave of Absence
154. Oath of Office
155. Appointment (Rev. 1993)
156. Medical Certificate
157. Daily Time Record
158. Acceptance of Resignation
159. Service Record
160. Medical Certificate for Employment
161. Personal Data Sheet
162. Employees Leave Card
163. Court Civil Docket
164. Court Criminal Docket
165. Statement of Daily Market Purchase
166. In-Patient Record
167. Doctor’s Prescription
168. Outside Patient Record form
169. Record Admission
170. Record of Person Subsisted
171. Monthly Subsistence Report
172. Pharmacist’s Record of Issues
173. Pharmacist’s Monthly Report of Drug Medicine Issued
174. Record of Services Outside Patients
175. Record of Hospital Collections
176. Temperature Record
177. Treatment Record
178. Patient’s Ledger Card
179. Laboratory Request
180. Clinical Laboratory Record
181. Extension Post
182. Surgical Memorandum
183. Clinical Case Record
184. History Record
185. Requisition of Equipment & Supplies
186. Report of Medical Examination
187. Record of Accountable Forms
188. Local Government Code
189. Auditing Requirement Typical Disbursement
190. Paper cover
191. Checks (Personal, MDS Commercial, Commercial & Continuous Form Checks,
Manager’s)
192. Stickers
193. Ordinance Violation Receipts
194. Special Bank Receipts
195. Bill Assessment Form
196. Gatepass
197. Declaration of Admission
198. Tickets (Parking, Terminal Fee, Admission, RORO)
199. Admission Tickets
200. Radio Station License
201. Ship Station License
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
309
202. Television Receive License
203. Dealer’s Permit
204. Aircraft Station License
205. Withdrawal Certificate for Manufactured Petroleum Products
206. Passport Slip
207. Authentication Slip
208. Form No. 89
209. Port User’s Pass
210. Water Bill Receipts
211. Blank Security Paper
212. Qualification Doc. Certificate
213. Form No. 162-Certificate of Payment
214. Form No. 36-Boat Note
215. Import Entry Declaration Form
216. Form 232-Authority to Change Bond Slip
217. Form 218-Certificate of Identification
218. Form 86-Inspector Certificate of Lading
219. Form 219- Cert. of Inspection & Loading
220. Form 237- Entry Rider
221. Form 116-Statement of Receipt of Duties Collections on Informal Entry
222. Short Term Promissory Note
223. Certificate of Competency-Seafarers
224. Vehicle Pass
225. Boat Note
226. Authority to Withdraw
227. Computation Sheet
228. Authority to Issue
229. Empty Sack Receipt
230. Empty Sack Issue
231. Gas & Oil Issuance Slip
232. Guidance & Counseling Certificate
233. Electronic Letter of Authority
234. Tax Payer’s Information sheet
235. Provisional Receipts
236. Provisional receipts
237. Special Allotment Release Order
238. Notice of Cash allocation
239. Service Stamps
240. Authentication Certificate
241. Postal ID’s
242. Diplomas
243. Transcript of Records
244. Registration Forms
245. Departure and Arrival Card
246. Terminal Fees Tickets
247. Permit to Carry Firearms
248. Motor Vehicle Registration Certificate
249. Parking Tickets
250. Market Tickets
251. All Official Receipts of Provincial and Treasurer's Offices of Local Government
Units
252. Dangerous Drugs prescription Form
Guidelines on the Procurement of Printing Services Appendix 20
310
253. All accountable forms of government hospitals
254. Seaman's Book
255. Passport
256. Documentary Stamps
B. Accountable forms identified as such by procuring entities, such as the following:
1. LTO and LTFRB accountable forms
2. POEA accountable forms
3. MMDA accountable forms
4. OWWA accountable forms
5. TESDA accountable forms
6. National Statistics Office accountable forms
7. Bureau of Customs accountable forms
8. SSS accountable forms
9. GSIS accountable forms
10. MARINA accountable forms
11. MMDA accountable forms
12. LRA accountable forms
13. DFA accountable forms
14. PAG-IBIG accountable forms
15. DBP accountable forms
16. PPA accountable forms
17. PRC accountable forms
18. PHILPOST accountable form
19. NFA accountable forms
20. DTI accountable forms
21. MIAA accountable forms
22. SBMA accountable forms
23. BFAD accountable forms
24. PEZA Forms 8104; 8105; 8106; 8110; 8112
25. PCSO Lotto Cards
26. NBI Clearance Forms (Local and Travel)
27. DepEd forms (Form 138; Form 137; Test Materials)
28. MMDA Motor Vehicle Violations Receipts
Guidelines on the Procurement of Water, Electricity,
Telecommunications and Internet Service Providers
Appendix 21
311
APPENDIX 21
GUIDELINES ON PROCUREMENT OF WATER, ELECTRICITY,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS
1.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall govern the procurement of water, electricity,
telecommunications (landline and cellular phone), and internet service providers by
government agencies as end users.
Section 5 (h) of Republic Act No. (R.A.) 9184 defines goods as referring to all items,
supplies, materials, and general support services which may be needed in the
transaction of public business or in the pursuit of any government undertaking. Such
definition necessarily includes the procurement of internet service providers and
public utility services, such as water, electricity, and telecommunication services.
2.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to meet the following objectives:
2.1 Prescribe the appropriate method under R.A. 9184 that applies to the
procurement of water, electricity, telecommunications, and internet service
providers; and
2.2 Provide additional guidelines to ensure that contractual arrangements with
service providers continue to be favorable to the interest of the government
applying cost-benefit analysis and, thus, remain consistent with the principles
of R.A. 9184.
3.0 PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES
3.1 Water and Electricity Services
Considering that water and electricity service providers are granted exclusive
franchises to operate within a specific territory, procurement of water and
electricity services shall be done through direct contracting under Section 50
(c) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)361 of R.A. 9184. This
provision does not apply to the purchase of bottled water or to the
procurement by any agency of the government, whether national or local, in
its operation as water or electric concessionaire (e.g. repair of pumping
stations).
3.2 Telecommunications (Landline and Cellular Phones)
3.2.1 Existing Lines
Telephone and cellular lines are critical in the day-to-day pursuit of
public business. Their continuity ensures proper coordination within
the organization and the efficient delivery of public service. Further,
361 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines on the Procurement of Water, Electricity,
Telecommunications and Internet Service Providers
Appendix 21
312
telephone and cellular numbers are usually identified with certain
government agencies or a range of public services that the
government may offer (e.g., 117). As such:
3.2.1.1 Contractual agreements previously entered into with
telecommunication companies shall be respected.
3.2.1.2 At the end of each year, however, the procuring entity
must assess the quality of service provided by its
telecommunication service provider. For instance, it must
compare the cost charged by its existing telephone or
cellular phone service provider and the range of services it
offers as against other service providers in the area.
3.2.1.3 If results of said assessment or cost-benefit analysis,
conducted by the end-user,362 continue to favor the
existing service provider, then the Head of the Procuring
Entity363 may simply renew its services. If it does not, then
the procuring entity should bid said services in accordance
with Subsection 3.2.2 of these guidelines. For efficiency
and economy, during the effectivity of the contract, or
upon its renewal, the PE may consider the expansion or
reduction of the services provided by the existing service
provider subject to the need of the PE and the best way by
which such need may be addressed and satisfied, subject
to existing budgeting, accounting and auditing rules.364
(a)
3.2.1.4 Repeat order under Section 51 of R.A. 9184 may be
resorted to by the procuring entity if additional lines are
needed during the year. For this purpose, the requirement
under Section 51 (c) of the IRR that the repeat order may
only be availed of within six (6) months from the effectivity
period stated in the Notice to Proceed arising from the
original contract may be dispensed with.365
3.2.2 New Lines
If the procuring entity does not have an existing telephone service
contractor or, after conduct of a cost-benefit analysis as required in
the preceding subsection, is not satisfied with the performance of its
previous service contractor, the following procurement methods are
prescribed:
362 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 41-2017 dated 21 December 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 24
April 2018.
363 Ibid.
364 Ibid.
365 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines on the Procurement of Water, Electricity,
Telecommunications and Internet Service Providers
Appendix 21
313
3.2.2.1 If there is more than one service contractor operating
within the area, competitive public bidding or any of the
applicable alternative methods of procurement. 366
(a)
3.2.2.2 If there is only one service contractor operating within the
area, direct contracting.
3.3 Internet Service Providers (ISP)
3.3.1 Existing ISPs
ISPs provide the initial infrastructure requirements (e.g., cabling)
necessary in the provision of internet access. Changing ISPs every
year may therefore prove to be more costly to government as every
new ISP would have to charge the procuring entity for this initial
investment. Further, changing ISPs entails interruption of internet
access and, thus, any public service dependent on such access. Thus:
3.3.1.1 Contractual agreements previously entered into with ISPs
shall be respected.
3.3.1.2 At the end of each year, however, the procuring entity
must assess the quality of service provided by its ISP. For
instance, it must compare the cost charged by said ISP and
the range of services it offers as against other service
providers in the area. It may also consider new
technologies that may prove less costly or those that are
more advantageous to the government in terms of use,
capacity and services offered, e.g. bandwidth, speed,
platform, additional services, such as, but not limited to
cloud computing, cloud storage, etc.367
(a)
In assessing the quality of service provided by its ISP,
procuring entities are encouraged to consult the
Department of Information and Communications
Technology or368 National Telecommunications Commission
or other relevant government agencies regarding any new
policy or directive in the implementation or use of new
technology. (a)
3.3.1.3 If the results of said assessment or cost-benefit analysis,
conducted by the end-user,369 continue to favor the
existing ISP, then the Head of the Procuring Entity may
simply renew its services. If it does not, then the Head of
the Procuring Entity370 should bid said services in
accordance with subsection 3.3.2 of these guidelines. For
366 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 41-2017 dated 21 December 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 24
April 2018.
367 Ibid.
368 Ibid.
369 Ibid.
370 Ibid.
Guidelines on the Procurement of Water, Electricity,
Telecommunications and Internet Service Providers
Appendix 21
314
(a)
efficiency and economy, during the effectivity of the
contract, or upon its renewal, the PE may consider the
expansion or reduction of the services provided by the
existing service provider subject to the need of the PE and
the best way by which such need may be addressed and
satisfied, subject to existing budgeting, accounting and
auditing rules. 371
3.3.2 New ISPs
If the procuring entity does not presently engage an ISP or, after
conduct of a cost-benefit analysis as required in the preceding
subsection, is not satisfied with the performance of its existing ISP,
the following procurement methods are prescribed:
3.3.2.1 If there are more than one service contractor operating
within the area, public bidding or any of the applicable
alternative methods of procurement. 372
(a)
3.3.2.2 If there is only one service contractor operating within the
area, direct contracting.
4.0 REPORTORIAL REQUIREMENT
Procurement of water, electricity, telecommunications, and internet service shall be
stated in the Annual Procurement Plan of the procuring entity. It shall include the
estimated budget for each service and the procurement method employed.
5.0 EFFECTIVITY
These guidelines shall take effect immediately.373
371 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 41-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 24
April 2018.
372 Ibid.
373 Issued through GPPB Resolution 019-2006, dated 06 December 2006, published in the Official Gazette on 09 April 2007.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
315
APPENDIX 22
REVISED GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT OF PETROLEUM, OIL, AND
LUBRICANT PRODUCTS
1.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall govern the use, under extraordinary circumstances, of an
index-based pricing scheme for procurement of petroleum, oil, and lubricants (POL)
in accordance with Section 61 of Republic Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184), otherwise
known as “Government Procurement Reform Act” and its Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR)374 and the GPPB Guidelines for Contract Price Escalation.
These rules and procedures shall govern the procurement of POL by the national
government, its departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state
universities and colleges, government-owned and/or controlled corporations,
government financial institutions and local government units when POL is a major
operational requirement necessary for the pursuit375 of their principal mandate. (a)
2.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to meet the following objectives:
2.1. To identify the conditions for the applicability of the index-based pricing
scheme in the procurement of POL products by a procuring entity.
2.2. To prescribe the rules and procedures on the use of index-based pricing
scheme for the procurement of POL in bulk.376
(a)
3.0 DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1 Bid Price- refers to the bid of the prospective supplier, less discounts given,
plus delivery cost, regardless of the index used in the procurement of
petroleum, oil, and lubricant (POL) products.377
(a)
3.2 Bulk Procurement – refers to any procurement which, by the totality of its
POL requirements and by their sheer volume, necessitates procurement from
suppliers for purpose of economies of scale.378
(a)
3.3 Total Contract Price - refers to the aggregate of the amounts set by a
procuring entity, as the ceiling, to meet the volume requirement for each type
of POL product; the value of which shall not exceed the approved budget for
the contract (ABC).
3.4 Delivery Cost - refers to cost of freight incurred by the Supplier from the
source to the delivery point, i.e., refinery to delivery point for deliveries exrefinery, or oil terminal/depot to delivery point for deliveries ex-depot
374 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
375 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 05-2018, dated 18 May 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August 2018.
376 Ibid.
377 Ibid.
378 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 26-2019 dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
316
(a)
3.5 Discounts - refers to the total deductions given by the prospective
supplier.379
(a)
3.6 Expanded Value Added Tax (E-VAT) - refers to a consumption tax on the
sale or importation of goods and services in the ordinary course of business.
3.7 Extraordinary Circumstance - refers to an event or occurrence, or series
of events or occurrences, before or during contract implementation, which
give(s) rise to price movements in petroleum and its derivative products.
3.8 Independent Commodity Information System – London Oil Report
or ICIS-LOR- refers to an information provider for the chemical and oil
industry, and is part of the Reed Business Information Ltd., a private entity,
based in London with office in Singapore.
3.9 Mean of Platts Singapore or MOPS - refers to the mean of the high and
low components of a Platts assessment for oil cargoes loading from
Singapore as officially released by S&P Global Platts, a provider of energy and
commodities information and a source of benchmark price assessments in the
physical commodity market based in Singapore. 380
3.10 Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant or POL Products - for purposes of these
guidelines, shall refer to those enumerated in Section 6 hereof.381
(a)
3.11 Wholesale Posted Price or WPP- refers to the reference fuel prices
individually set by local refiners and traders subject to periodic changes based
on the movement in crude oil prices, foreign exchange, and all other costs
without hauling charge, dealer’s mark-up and dealer’s E-VAT.(a) 382
3.12 Vehicles – any means of conveyance to transport passengers and carry
cargoes, goods, or effects on land, air or sea.383
(n)
4.0 CONDITIONS FOR APPLICABILITY OF THESE GUIDELINES
These guidelines shall be applicable in cases of bulk procurement of POL by the
national government, its departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state
universities and colleges, government-owned and/or controlled corporations,
government financial institutions and local government units where POL procurement
is a major requirement in their operations. (a)
POL requirements shall be considered major if the use of the same is384 necessary in
the primary operation of the procuring entity and in the pursuit385 of its principal
mandate. The duration of the contract to cover the POL requirement of the
procuring entity may be one year or more. In the case of multi-year, the same shall
379 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 26-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30
December 2019.
380 Ibid.
381 Ibid.
382 Ibid.
383 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 05-2018, dated 18 May 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August 2018.
384 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 05-2018, dated 18 May 2018, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August 2018.
385 Ibid.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
317
be subject to the issuance of Multi-Year Contracting Authority (MYCA) or its
equivalent document.386
(a)
5.0 GENERAL GUIDELINES
5.1 The rules and regulations governing competitive bidding shall apply whenever
the rules in these Guidelines are silent.
5.2 Right to Inspect. The procuring entity shall allow the Department of Energy
(DOE) to inspect the procuring entity’s fuel facilities, if there is any, subject to
DOE’s guidelines to check compliance to Philippine National Standards (PNS)
on products and facilities, among others. The procuring entity may provide
the delivery schedule of the supplier to DOE.387
(n)
6.0 INDEX-BASED PRICING FOR PETROLEUM, OIL AND LUBRICANT
PRODUCTS
6.1. The WPP index shall be used in the procurement of the following products:
i. Premium, Unleaded or Regular Gasoline;
ii. Automotive Diesel Oil
6.2. The MOPS index shall be used in the procurement of the following products:
i. Industrial Fuel Oil;
ii. Low Sulfur Fuel Oil;
iii. Industrial Diesel Oil;
iv. Jet A-1;388
v. AVGAS; and389
vi. Aviation Fuel Additives.390
6.3. In the procurement of all types of lubricant products, the procuring entity
may adopt either a fixed or index-based pricing. If its assessment or costbenefit analysis indicates that index-based pricing is more advantageous,
then it shall adopt the ICIS-LOR index.
6.4. The foregoing list shall be subject to annual review, modification or reclassification by the GPPB, or as often as it deems necessary.
7.0 SPECIFIC GUIDELINES391
7.1. The Procuring Entity shall indicate in its ITB among others the ABC per
product with indicative volume for bidding purposes only. Regardless of the
index used, the bid price shall be determined by the prospective supplier’s
bid, less discounts given plus delivery cost.
386 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 26-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
387 Ibid.
388 Ibid.
389 Ibid.
390 Ibid.
391 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 26-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
318
7.2. Cost for E-VAT and other governmental costs are presumed to be included in
the computation of the bid price by the prospective suppliers.
7.3. For purposes of bid evaluation and/or comparison of bids, regardless of the
index used, the Lowest Calculated Bid shall be determined by identifying the
bidder that offered the lowest bid price.
7.4. For purposes of payment, the bid price, discount and the delivery cost stated
in the contract shall be fixed from the time of the bidding through the term of
the contract. Delivery should be done at the end of the week. The amount to
be paid by the procuring entity for POL requirements actually delivered and
duly received by it shall be:
7.4.1. For the WP index, the bid price, less the discounts offered, if
any, plus or minus the weekly price adjustments duly posted by
the Oil Industry Management Bureau (OIMB) of the
Department of Energy (DOE) in its Price Watch / Price
Adjustments / Fuel page in the DOE’s website, and the delivery
cost stated in the contract, at the date of actual delivery
[Payment = (bid price – discounts) +/- (DOE) weekly price
adjustments for gasoline and diesel)+ (delivery cost or DC);
7.4.2. For the MOPS index, the bid price, less the discounts offered,
if any, plus or minus the MOPS week on week price
adjustments, the delivery cost stated in the contract, at the
date of actual delivery [Payment = (bid price – discounts) +/-
(MOPS week on week price adjustments) + (DC)]; or
7.4.3. For the ICIS-LOR Index, the bid price, less the discounts
offered, if any, plus or minus the ICIS-LOR pricing adjustment,
the delivery cost stated in the contract, at the date of actual
delivery [Payment =(bid price –discounts) +/- (ICIS pricing
adjustments) + (DC)].
7.5. The supplier will provide a detailed price adjustment for its POL products
actually delivered, as part of its billing (weekly price adjustments for WP
index, daily traded MOPS pricing, and ICIS pricing adjustment), together with
its certification under oath that:
7.5.1. The supplier’s price adjustments are those reported and duly
posted at DOE’s website for products using the WP index;
7.5.2. The supplier’s week on week price adjustments are based on
the daily prices traded in MOPS for products using the MOPS
index; or
7.5.3. The supplier’s price adjustment is based on ICIS-LOR pricing
for the month for lubricant products.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
319
7.6. Illustrative Example Computation
7.6.1. Illustrative Example of the First Delivery for Diesel (n)
a. Bid opening was 2nd week January. Winning bidder offered
bid price of P25.00/liter for diesel, already with discount.
Delivery cost is 5c/liter (fixed).
b. Total Contract Price is P7,500,000.00 for estimated 200,000
liters of diesel.
c. Staggered deliveries. PE has ordered for 16,000-22,000
liters to be delivered at the scheduled deliveries (i.e.
monthly delivery, but end of the week), subject to
adjustment of the volumes.
d. End user may verify the price adjustments by checking the
DOE’s website, www.doe.gov.ph, go to Price Watch, then
Price Adjustments tab/menu, then Fuels.
For example, first delivery is at 3rd week of February for diesel.
Bid price at 2nd week Jan. 25.00/liter (fixed)
Price Adjustments + (0.70/liter week3 Jan)
+ (0.70/liter week4 Jan)
+ (0.75/liter week1 Feb)
+ (0.00/liter week2 Feb)
+ (0.70/liter week3 Feb)
Total Price, as adjusted P 27.85/liter
Volume * 22,000 liters
Price * Volume P 612,700
DC + 1,100 (fixed)
Actual payable P 613,800
7.6.2. Illustrative Example of the Computation for First Delivery of
AVGAS
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
320
a. Bid opening was 2nd week January. Winning bidder offered
bid price of P20.00/liter for AVGAS, already with discount.
Delivery cost is 5c/liter (fixed).
b. Total Contract Price is P2,200,000.00 for estimated 120,000
liters of diesel.
c. Staggered deliveries. PE has ordered for 10,000-12,000 liters
to be delivered at the scheduled deliveries (i.e. bi-monthly
delivery, but end of the week), subject to adjustment of the
volumes.
For example, first delivery is on the end of 2nd week
February (i.e. February 15) for AVGAS.
1. Bid price at 3rd week Jan (i.e. Jan. 18) P20.00/liter
(fixed)
2. MOPS week on week Price Adjustments: difference
between average of the past week and the average
of present week; check daily traded MOPS pricing
which is in US dollars per Barrel (bbl):
2.1. Week 0, Jan. 18: Monday MOPS price at
$60/bbl+ Tue MOPS price at $63/bbl + Wed
MOPS price at $64/bbl+ Thurs MOPS price at
$62/bbl + Friday MOPS price at $60/ bbl, divide
by 5, to get the average.
2.2. Week 1, Jan. 25: Monday MOPS price at
$61/bbl+ Tue MOPS price at $63/bbl + Wed
MOPS price at $64/bbl+ Thurs MOPS price at
$64/bbl + Friday MOPS price at $62/bbl, divide
by 5, to get the average.
2.3. Thus: week 0 ave. $61.8/bbl – week 1 ave. of
$62.8/bbl, = increase of $1/bbl for week 1
(Jan.25).
2.4. Get weekly average for week 2. Get difference
from week 1 (Jan. 25) against week 2 (Feb. 1).
The difference is the week on week price
adjustment for week 2. Repeat process on
getting week on week price adjustments until
first delivery date (Feb.15).
2.5. Convert the peso to dollar and the barrel to liters
(1 Oil Barrel to 159 liters) per week. Use the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) exchange rate
at the end of the week.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
321
3. MOPS week on week price adjustments:
+ (0.33/liter Jan 25)
+ (0.00/liter Feb 01)
- (0.07/liter Feb 08)
+ (0.27/liter Feb 15)
Total Price, as adjusted P 20.87/liter
Volume * 10,000 liters
Price * Volume P 208,700
DC + P 500 (fixed)
Actual payable P209,200
delivered Feb.15).
7.7. For staggered deliveries, the end- user or acceptance team shall make, after
every delivery, an accounting of the amount actually payable based on the
date of the delivery receipt to determine the allowable unit/volume that may
be ordered from the remaining amount allotted for each POL product. The
procuring entity shall be allowed to make adjustments in the units/volume to
be delivered per type of product to conform to the remaining amount in the
total contract price.
7.8. Illustrative Example of the Computation for Succeeding Deliveries for Diesel.
(n)
Same considerations under 7.6.1.
First delivery was on 3rd week of February for diesel,
second delivery was on 3rd week of March for diesel,
third delivery was on 3rd week of April for diesel, and so on.
First – Fourth Deliveries were at 22,000 liters
Payments made for the first delivery (February) P 613,800
Second delivery (March) P 654,500
Third delivery (April) P 684,200
Fourth delivery (May) P 737,000
Total payments as of May P 2,689,500
Available funds as of end of May P 4,810,500
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
322
Estimated remaining liters of diesel for delivery 112,000
PE decides to adjust the volumes (upwards or downwards) for the next two
months, which may be based on usage and projected price adjustments, or
based on contractor’s monthly balance of the POL budget of the PE.
Payment made on fifth delivery (June) P 796,530 at 21,000 liters
Payment made on six delivery (July) P 796,000 at 20,000 liters
Total payment (Jun-Jul) P1,592,530
Available funds as of end of July P3,217,970
Estimated remaining liters of diesel for delivery 71,000
PE decides to adjust the volumes (upwards or downwards) for the next two
months which may be based on usage and projected price adjustments, or
based on contractor’s monthly balance of the POL budget of the PE.
Payment made on seventh delivery (Aug) P 788,500 at 19,000 liters
Payment made on eight delivery (Sept) P 767,700 at 18,000 liters
Total payment (Aug-Sept) P1,556,200
Available funds as of end of Sept. P1,661,770
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
323
Estimated remaining liters of diesel for delivery 34,000
7.9. If during contract implementation, the total contract price for the project
would have been consumed notwithstanding that the requirements were not
fully delivered in the units / volume contemplated, no further order and
payments shall be made. This provision shall form part of the bidding
documents.
7.10. Illustrative Example for the Assessment of Units/Volume Contemplated
Remaining estimated volume for Diesel 34,000 liters
Available funds as of end of Sept. P1,661,770
PE decides to adjust volumes (upwards or downwards) for the next two
months (Ninth and Tenth deliveries) based on remaining POL budget. No
further order and payments to be made for the eleventh and twelfth
scheduled deliveries when the total contract price or POL Budget is
consumed.
Revised Guidelines on Index-Based Pricing for Procurement of
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Products
Appendix 22
324
8.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines amend GPPB Resolution No. 11-2007, dated 31 May 2007 and
GPPB Resolution No. 05-2018, dated 18 May 2018 and392 shall take effect
immediately.393
(a)
392 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 26-2019, dated 30 October 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019.
Guidelines on Procurement of Security and Janitorial Services Appendix 23
325
APPENDIX 23
GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT OF SECURITY AND JANITORIAL SERVICES
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
Under Section 5 (h) of Republic Act No. 9184 (R.A. 9184), as reiterated in Section 5
(r) of its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)394, procurement of general
support services, including non-personal or contractual services, such as security and
janitorial services, falls under the definition of goods. Thus, in the procurement of
security or janitorial services, the winning bid is determined by the lowest calculated
and responsive bid.
It is recognized, however, that the proper and efficient procurement of security and
janitorial services should be based not solely on cost, but should also take into
consideration a range of other factors, such as, but not limited to, length of contract,
standards of internal governance, adequacy of resources, levels of training, and
adherence to labor and other social legislation.
2.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall govern the procurement of security and janitorial services by
government agencies.
These guidelines shall not apply to the procurement of other general support
services, such as, repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, trucking,
hauling, and other services.
3.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to meet the following objectives:
3.0. To prescribe an objective set of parameters in the evaluation of technical
proposals for security and janitorial services;
3.1. To provide conditions on the use of multi-year contracts for security and
janitorial services.
4.0 ADDITIONAL SET OF TECHNICAL PARAMETERS
4.1 Procuring entities are highly encouraged to evaluate the technical proposal of
bidders using the additional set of parameters prescribed in Appendix A of
these guidelines. However, considering that procuring entities have different
needs and requirements, the minimum standard for each parameter shall be
determined by the procuring entity.
Additional technical parameters and minimum standard for each parameter
must be expressly stated under Section VII. Technical Specifications of the
Philippine Bidding Documents for the Procurement of Goods (PBDs).
394 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
Guidelines on Procurement of Security and Janitorial Services Appendix 23
326
4.2 To determine compliance with these parameters, procuring entity may require
additional documents or materials as part of the bidder's technical proposal.
These additional documents or materials must be expressly stated in Section
VII: Technical Specifications of the PBDs for the Procurement of Goods
consistent with Section 25.2 (a) (vii) of the IRR of R.A. 9184. 395
4.3 The procuring entity shall check compliance with the technical parameters
using a non-discretionary "pass/fail" criteria
5.0 MULTI-YEAR CONTRACTS
Procuring entities may enter into multi-year contracts, but not to exceed three (3)
years, in the procurement of security and janitorial services, subject to the following
conditions:
5.1. The Invitation to Apply for Eligibility and to Bid must expressly state the
following:
5.1.1. Duration of the contract to be bid, which should not exceed three
(3) years;
5.1.2. The Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) for the first year only.
5.2. All bid prices for a duration of three (3) years shall be fixed and shall not be
adjusted during contract implementation, except for the following:
5.2.1. Increase in minimum daily wage pursuant to law or new wage order
issued after date of bidding,
5.2.2. Increase in taxes; and
5.2.3. If during the term of the contract the procuring entity sees the need
for an increase or decrease in the number of security guards or
janitorial attendants, the resulting cost of said increase or decrease,
provided that the ABC for the relevant year is not exceeded.
The procuring entity shall ensure that the foregoing allowable price
adjustments are specified under Section 8.1 of the Special Conditions of
Contract of the PBDs.
5.3. The Financial Proposal shall contain a breakdown of all costs, including cost
of supplies and equipment, necessary for the execution of the contract.
5.4. Procuring entities shall expressly provide, under Section Vll. Technical
Specifications, which shall form part of the contract under Section 13.1 of the
General Conditions of the Contract of the PBDs, that the service
provider/contractor shall maintain a satisfactory level of performance
throughout the term of the contract based on a prescribed set of
performance criteria.
395 As amended by the 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. No. 9184.
Guidelines on Procurement of Security and Janitorial Services Appendix 23
327
The performance criteria to be applied shall include, among others, the
following: (i) quality of service delivered; (ii) time management; (iii)
management and suitability of personnel; (iv) contract administration and
management; and (v) provision of regular progress reports.
5.5. Before end of each year, procuring entities shall conduct an assessment or
evaluation of the performance of the service provider/contractor based on the
set of performance criteria prescribed under Section VII. Technical
Specifications.
5.6. Based on its assessment, the procuring entity may pre-terminate the contract
for failure by the service provider/contractor to perform its obligations
thereon following the procedure prescribed under the Guidelines on
Termination of Contracts issued by the Government Procurement Policy Board
under Resolution No.018-2004 dated 22 December 2004.
6.0 EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation and upon filing with
the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of
these guidelines.396
396 Issued through GPPB Resolution 024-2007, dated 28 September 2007, published in the Manila Times on 26 October
2007.
Guidelines on Procurement of Security and Janitorial Services Appendix 23
328
APPENDIX A
ADDITIONAL SET OF TECHNICAL PARAMETERS
A. Security Services
1. Stability
(a) Years of Experience
(b) Liquidity of the Contractor
(c) Organizational Set-up
2. Resources
(a) No. of Licensed Firearms
(b) No. and Kind of Communication Devices
(c) No. and Kind of Motor-Powered Vehicles
(d) No. of Licensed Guards
3. Security Plan
4. Other Factors
(a) Recruitment and Selection Criteria
(b) Completeness of Uniforms and Other Paraphernalia
B. Janitorial Services
1. Stability
(a) Years of Experience
(b) Liquidity of the Contractor
(c) Organizational set-up
2. Resources
(a) No. and Kind of Equipment and Supplies
(b) No. of Janitors and Supervisors
3. Housekeeping Plan
4. Other Factors
(a) Recruitment and Selection Criteria
(b) Completeness of Uniforms and Other Paraphernalia
Revised Guidelines on the Extension of Contracts for General
Support Services
Appendix 24
329
APPENDIX 24
REVISED GUIDELINES ON THE EXTENSION OF CONTRACTS FOR GENERAL
SUPPORT SERVICES
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
As a general policy, extensions of contracts for general support services are
discouraged.
2.0 PURPOSE
These guidelines are formulated to identify the conditions for the allowance of
contract extension and to prescribe the rules and procedures governing the same,
for the purpose of averting hiatus in support services essential, indispensable, or
necessary in the operations of a procuring entity.
3.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These guidelines shall govern the extension of ongoing contracts of general support
services which are essential, indispensable, or necessary to support the operations of
any of the procuring entities or for the enhancement of the welfare of its personnel
to include, but shall not be limited to, non-personal or contractual services such as
maintenance of equipment and furniture, janitorial and security services.
However, these guidelines shall not apply to contracts with water, electricity,
telecommunications, and internet service providers, which shall be governed by the
Guidelines on Procurement of Water, Electricity, Telecommunications and Internet
Service Providers provided issued by the Government Procurement Policy Board
under Resolution No. 19-2006, dated 6 December 2006.
4.0 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR EXTENSION
Procuring entities may extend the duration or effectivity of an ongoing contract
about to expire, under the following conditions:
4.1 No contract extension shall exceed one (1) year.
4.2 The original contract subject of the extension was awarded in accordance
with the provisions of Republic Act 9184 (R.A. 9184) and its Implementing
Rules and Regulations (IRR).397
4.3 The procuring entity concerned has substantially undertaken the procurement
activities required prior to award of the new contract under R.A. 9184 and its
IRR.398
4.4 The aforesaid contract extension is undertaken due to circumstances beyond
its control and the procuring entity concerned cannot award a new contract
within a month after the expiration of the term of the original contract.
397 As amended by GPPB Resolution 03-2011, dated 28 January 2011, published in the Manila Times on 6 April 2011.
398 Ibid.
Revised Guidelines on the Extension of Contracts for General
Support Services
Appendix 24
330
4.5 The contemplated extension is merely an emergency measure to maintain
status quo in the operations of the Procuring Entity and to avoid interruption
of service.
4.6 The current service provider has not violated any of the provisions of the
original contract.
4.7 The terms and conditions of the original contract shall not be changed or
modified, except when changes or modifications will redound to the
advantage of the government at no additional cost to the Procuring Entity.
5.0 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
5.1 All contract extensions shall be subject to the prior approval of the Head of
the Procuring Entity or his/her duly authorized representative upon
recommendation of the Bids and Awards Committee.
5.2 In addition to the foregoing, if the proposed contract extension exceeds six
(6) months, the Head of the Procuring Entity or his/her duly authorized
representative shall immediately report to the Government Procurement
Policy Board in writing of its intent to extend beyond six months.
6.0 REPEALING CLAUSE
These Guidelines repeal GPPB Resolution 08-2005 and the amendments thereto per
GPPB Resolution 03-2006, dated 28 April 2005 and 11 March 2006, respectively.
7.0 EFFECTIVITY
7.1 These guidelines or any amendments hereto shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
nationwide circulation.399
399 Issued through GPPB Resolution 023-2007, dated 28 September 2007, published in the Manila Times on 26 October
2007.
Guidelines on Comparison of Bids Submitted by Cooperatives Appendix 25
331
APPENDIX 25
GPPB CIRCULAR 02-2010
GUIDELINES ON COMPARISON OF BIDS SUBMITTED BY COOPERATIVES
1.0 Purpose
This Circular400 is being issued to clarify the procedure for comparison of bids
submitted by cooperatives in line with the principle that all bids shall be evaluated on
an equal footing to ensure fair and competitive bid comparison.
2.0 Coverage
All Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government,
including State Universities and Colleges, Government Owned and/or Controlled
Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, and Local Government Units.
3.0 Guidelines on Comparison of Bids Involving Cooperatives and NonCooperatives
3.1 Under Section 32.2.2 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of
Republic Act 9184, all bidders shall be required to include the cost of all
taxes, such as, but not limited to, value added tax, income tax, local taxes,
and other fiscal levies and duties which shall be itemized in the bid form and
reflected in the detailed estimates.
Such bids, including said taxes, shall be the basis for bid evaluation and
comparison.
3.2 Since cooperatives are granted tax exemptions by law, they enjoy a clear
advantage over non-cooperatives.
3.3 To ensure that all bids shall be evaluated on an equal footing, all taxes
itemized by non-cooperatives in their bids and which cooperatives are exempt
from shall be added to the bids of cooperatives strictly for purposes of
evaluation and comparison.
3.4 If, after evaluation and comparison, the bid submitted by a cooperative is still
determined to be the lowest bid, the taxes added during bid evaluation shall
be removed. Award of contract shall be based on the original bid price,
subject to Section 34.4 of the IRR.
4.0 This Circular shall take effect immediately.
5.0 For guidance and compliance.
400 Issued on 24 November 2010.
Honoraria of GPPB-TSO Recognized Trainers Appendix 26
332
APPENDIX 26
GPPB CIRCULAR 10-2015
HONORARIA OF GPPB-TSO RECOGNIZED TRAINERS
1.0 Purpose:
This Circular401 is being issued to reiterate to all Government Agencies the mandate
of GPPB Resolution No. 16-2013 requiring adherence to the standard rates on the
payment of honoraria to GPPB-TSO Recognized Trainers as provided in DBM Circular
No. 2007-1, and to remind all GPPB-TSO Recognized Trainers to received honoraria
pursuant only to the rates prescribed under DBM Circular No. 2007-1.
2.0 Coverage:
2.1 All Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government
including State Universities and Colleges, Government Owned and/or
Controlled Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, and Local
Government Units; and
2.2 All GPPB-TSO Recognized Trainers, who serve as Lectures, Resource Persons
and Speakers in Seminars, Training Programs and other similar activities on
RA 9184 and its revised IRR.
3.0 Payment of Honoraria and Rate of Honoraria:
3.1 Government Agencies shall adhere to the provisions of GPPB Resolution No.
16- 2013 confirming the imposition of standard rates of honoraria mandated
under DBM Circular No. 2007-1; and
3.2 GPPB-TSO Recognized Trainers who serve as Lecturers, Resources Persons or
Speakers in Seminars, Training Programs and other similar activities on R.A.
No. 9184 and its revised IRR shall receive honoraria only within the rates
prescribed under DBM Circular No. 2007-1.
4.0 This Circular shall take effect immediately.
5.0 For guidance and compliance.
401 Issued on 18 August 2015.
Guidelines for the Establishment of Negative List of Surety
and/or Insurance Companies
Appendix 27
333
APPENDIX 27
GUIDELINES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NEGATIVE LIST OF SURETY AND/OR
INSURANCE COMPANIES
1. POLICY STATEMENT
1.1. Pursuant to Sections 27.2, 39.2 and 62.2.3.3 of Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184, surety bond is one of the
acceptable forms of bid, performance, and warranty securities, provided it is
callable upon demand and accompanied by an Insurance Commission
Certificate stating that the surety and/or insurance company is authorized to
issue such bond or security.
1.2. In view of the prevalence of instances when procuring entities are unable to
claim on surety bonds submitted by bidders, there exists pressing need to
protect procuring entities and ensure the reliability of surety bonds as an
acceptable form of bid security.
1.3. The GPPB shall prepare, maintain, and update a Negative List based on the
submitted names by different procuring entities, and shall be posted in the
GPPB website, which shall include the name/s of the erring surety and/or
insurance companies and the effectivity of their suspension.
2. PURPOSE
1.1. These Guidelines are formulated to provide the necessary steps and procedures
on the establishment of a list of surety and/or insurance companies that have
failed to honor their obligations on the surety bond they issued as bid,
performance, and/or warranty securities of bidders participating in public
procurement.
1.2. It may also serve as the first step and/or basis of government agencies in filing
of complaints against erring surety and/or insurance companies with the
Insurance Commission.
3. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
3.1 These Guidelines shall apply to procurement activities of all branches,
constitutional commissions and offices, national government agencies (NGAs),
departments, bureaus, offices, and other instrumentalities of the Government,
including government-owned and/or controlled corporations (GOCCs),
government financial institutions (GFIs), state universities and colleges (SUCs),
and local government units (LGUs) requiring the submission of bid,
performance, or warranty security.
4. DEFINITION OF TERMS
4.1 Suretyship is an agreement whereby a party called the surety company
guarantees the performance by another party called the principal or obligor,
i.e., bidder, of an obligation or undertaking in favor of a third party called the
Guidelines for the Establishment of Negative List of Surety
and/or Insurance Companies
Appendix 27
334
obligee, i.e., procuring entity. It includes official recognizances, stipulations,
bonds or undertakings issued by any company by virtue of and under the
provisions of Act No. 536, as amended by Act No. 2206.
4.2 Surety Company includes all individuals, partnerships, associations, or
corporations, including government-owned or controlled corporations or
entities, engaged as principals in the insurance or suretyship business,
including insurance companies issuing surety bonds, and have an existing
Certificate of Authority issued by the Insurance Commission.
4.3 Surety Bond refers to a bond issued by a surety company to guarantee the
performance by the bidder of an obligation or undertaking in favor of the
procuring entity, i.e., bid security, performance security, or warranty security.
4.4 Callable on Demand refers to the surety company’s absolute, primary, and
direct responsibility and liability to the procuring entity for an obligation that is
accessory or collateral to the valid principal obligation contracted by a bidder by
virtue of the surety’s undertaking to be bound solidarily with the bidder.
4.5 Bid Security refers to the guaranty, in the form and amount prescribed, that
the successful bidder shall, within ten (10) calendar days or less, as indicated in
the Instructions to Bidders, from receipt of the notice of award, enter into
contract with the procuring entity and furnish the performance security
required in Section 39 of the IRR, except when Section 37.1 of the IRR allows a
longer period.
4.6 Performance Security refers to the guaranty posted prior to the signing of
the contract for the faithful performance by the winning bidder of its obligations
under the contract in accordance with the Bidding Documents in an amount
equal to the percentage of the total contract price in accordance with the
schedule provided in Section 39.2 of the IRR.
4.7 Warranty Security refers to the guaranty that the contractor shall perform
his responsibilities as prescribed in Section 62.2.3.1(a) of the IRR against
“Structural Defects” or “Structural Failures” for infrastructure projects.
5. GROUNDS FOR INCLUSION IN THE NEGATIVE LIST
The following are the grounds for the inclusion of a surety company in the Negative
List:
a) Refusal or failure of the surety company to honor the claim against the surety
bond upon written demand of the procuring entity for whom the same was
issued;
b) Issuance by the surety company of an illegal, fraudulent, false, deceptive, or
illegal surety bond to serve as bid, performance, or warranty security of the
bidder participating in government procurement transactions; or
c) A surety company determined by the Insurance Commission to be included in
the list.
Guidelines for the Establishment of Negative List of Surety
and/or Insurance Companies
Appendix 27
335
6. PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES FOR INCLUSION IN THE NEGATIVE LIST
1.1. Initiation
1.1.1. Once a bidder has been duly determined to have defaulted in the
performance of its obligations as prescribed under Sections 27.1, 39.1
and 62.2.3.1 of the IRR, the head of the procuring entity (HOPE),
upon recommendation of the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) or
the Implementing Unit (IU), shall forfeit the surety bond issued as bid,
performance, or warranty security.
1.1.2. The procuring entity shall notify the bidder and the concerned surety
company relative to the act/s committed by the bidder which would
result to the forfeiture of the surety bond, and shall make a claim on
the surety bond.
1.2. Verification
Upon denial of the claims on the surety bond or if the surety company
committed any of the grounds enumerated under Section 5 above, the BAC/IU,
shall, within a period of seven (7) calendar days, verify the existence of the
aforementioned grounds and shall prepare and submit a Verified Report to the
HOPE.
1.3. Show Cause Order
1.3.1. Upon receipt of the Verified Report and determination of the validity
of the action, the HOPE shall issue a Show Cause Order to the surety
company:
a) Stating the grounds for its issuance;
b) Requiring the surety/insurance company to show cause within
seven (7) calendar days;
c) Informing the surety/insurance company of the effects of
inclusion in the Negative List;
d) Providing a copy of the Verified Report; and
e) Providing other special instructions, when necessary.
1.3.2. Within a period of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the Show
Cause Order, the concerned surety company shall submit to the HOPE
a Verified Position Paper stating why the company should not be
included in the Negative List
Guidelines for the Establishment of Negative List of Surety
and/or Insurance Companies
Appendix 27
336
1.4. Decision
1.4.1. Upon receipt of the Verified Position Paper, the HOPE shall assess,
review and decide the matter, based on the representations made and
evidence submitted, within a non-extendible period of ten (10)
calendar days.
1.4.2. If the surety company fails, either by inaction or by default, to show
cause after the lapse of the seven (7) day period, the HOPE shall
issue a decision to include the concerned surety company in the
Negative List.
1.4.3. If the HOPE determines that the surety company committed any of
the afore-stated grounds, it shall issue a decision to include surety
company in the Negative List. Otherwise, the HOPE shall dismiss the
case. In either case, the decision of the HOPE shall clearly and
distinctly state the facts, evidence and the law upon which it is based.
1.4.4. The HOPE may, at any time before receipt of the surety company’s
Verified Position Paper, withdraw the Show Cause Order if the claims
on the surety bond have been settled by the surety company
concerned.
1.5. Notice of Decision
The HOPE shall immediately serve a written notice of the Decision to the
surety/insurance company, and upon receipt by the surety/insurance company
thereof, furnish a copy of the Decision to the Insurance Commission and the
GPPB, through its Technical Support Office (TSO), indicating the following:
a) Name of the surety companies;
b) Surety bond number;
c) Contract of suretyship;
d) Ground/s for its inclusion; and
e) Effects of inclusion.
1.6. Inclusion in the Negative List
1.6.1. Upon receipt of a copy of the Decision, the GPPB, through its TSO,
shall include the name of the surety company in the Negative List and
shall post the same at the GPPB website for a period of two (2) years,
which may thereafter be extended to another period of two (2) years
upon notice from the procuring entity that the surety/insurance
company remains in default.
1.6.2. Upon inclusion in the Negative List, the GPPB, through its TSO, shall
immediately notify the surety company of such status.
Guidelines for the Establishment of Negative List of Surety
and/or Insurance Companies
Appendix 27
337
7. EFFECT OF INCLUSION IN THE NEGATIVE LIST
7.1. The inclusion in the Negative List shall result in the rejection of the surety
bonds issued by the suspended surety/insurance company submitted as bid,
performance, or warranty security in the relevant procurement activities of
NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs and LGUs during the period of inclusion and
suspension.
7.2. The BAC shall ensure that surety bonds issued as bid, performance, or
warranty security submitted are not issued by surety companies included in the
list. Any bidder who submits a surety bond issued by a surety company in the
Negative List shall be declared ineligible.
7.3. Considering that surety companies are subject to the jurisdiction and
supervision of the Insurance Commission, the list may serve as basis for the
pursuit of complaint/s filed before the Insurance Commission, if any.
8. DELISTING
The GPPB-TSO shall remove a surety company from the Negative List even before
the expiration of the period upon the advice of the PE or by the IC in cases where
the IC had amicably settled the matter or adjudicated the issue with finality, unless
the surety or insurance company remains in default, and/or the PE has duly elevated
the matter to a higher authority or court on appeal or certiorari.
9. AMENDMENTS
9.1. In the implementation of these guidelines, the GPPB may introduce
modifications thereto through the amendment of its specific provisions as the
need arises.
9.2. Any amendment to these guidelines shall be applicable to government
projects after the effectivity of the said amendment.
10. EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect immediately after its publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the
University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of these
guidelines.402
402 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 15-2012, dated 29 June 2012, published in the Official Gazette on 1 April 2015.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Goods and Services,
Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services to be Procured
and Performed Overseas
Appendix 28
338
APPENDIX 28
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES,
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS AND CONSULTING SERVICES TO BE PROCURED
AND PERFORMED OVERSEAS403
1. PURPOSE
The Guidelines are formulated to provide rules and procedures for the procurement of
Goods and Services, Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting Services to be procured
and performed overseas; and to ensure transparency, efficiency, competition, and
accountability in the procurement process.
2. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
The Guidelines shall apply to the national government, its branches, constitutional
offices, departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state universities and
colleges, government-owned and/or -controlled corporations, government financial
institutions, and local government units, in the procurement of Goods and Services,
Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting Services to be procured and performed
overseas. Consequently, if the project will be performed within the Philippines, the
relevant provisions of the 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of
Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 on Competitive Bidding or Alternative Modes of
Procurement shall apply.
3. GENERAL GUIDELINES
a. Annual Procurement Plan (APP). In accordance with Section 7.2 of the IRR,
no procurement shall be undertaken unless it is in accordance with the approved
APP of the Procuring Entity.
b. Advertisement and Posting of Procurement Opportunity. The Procuring
Entity may dispense with the advertisement in the newspaper as prescribed in
Section 21.2.1 of the IRR of R.A. 9184. Accordingly, the Procuring Entity shall
post the Request for Quotation (RFQ) or Request for Proposal (RFP) in the 1.)
PhilGEPS website, once the facility for the procurement of Goods and Services,
Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting Services to be procured and performed
overseas becomes available; 2.) The official website of the Procuring Entity; and
3.) In a conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the
Procuring Entity.
c. Documentary Requirements. The Procuring Entity shall validate whether it is
entering into a contract with a technically, legally and financially capable
supplier, contractor or consultant by requiring the submission of relevant
documents or through other means, taking into consideration the usual trade
and business practices being observed in the host country. In all cases, the
Procuring Entity shall base its award on the quotations received in accordance
with the corresponding RFQ/RFP and Abstract of Quotations.
403 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 28-2017, dated 31 July 2017, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 22
December 2017.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Goods and Services,
Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services to be Procured
and Performed Overseas
Appendix 28
339
d. Delegation of Authority. For purposes of efficiency, expediency, and
economy, the conduct of procurement and/or award of contract under the
Guidelines may be delegated to a specific personnel or committee, other than
the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC), duly authorized by the HOPE.
e. Posting of Notice of Award, Contract and Notice to Proceed. Unless the
contract involves and affects national security as determined by the HOPE, the
BAC, through its Secretariat, or the authorized personnel or committee shall post
the relevant information of the contract in the PhilGEPS website once the facility
becomes available, the website of the Procuring Entity, and at any conspicuous
place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity within ten
(10) calendar days from their issuance.
f. Bid, Performance and Warranty Securities. If deemed necessary, the
Procuring Entity may require the submission of a Bid, Performance, or Warranty
Securities or its equivalent.
4. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES
a. The End-User shall submit to the BAC or to the authorized personnel or
committee a purchase/job request, which indicates the technical specifications,
scope of work, terms of reference, ABC and other terms and conditions relevant
to the Goods and Services, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services to be
procured.
b. The BAC or the authorized personnel or committee shall determine the technical,
legal, and financial eligibility requirements to be submitted by the prospective
bidders or any other means to verify the technical, legal and financial capability
of the supplier, contractor or consultant.
c. The BAC or the authorized personnel or committee shall prepare and send the
Request for Quotations (RFQ) or Request for Proposals (RFP) to at least three
(3) suppliers, contractors or consultants of known qualifications. This,
notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required postings
shall be allowed to participate. Receipt of at least one (1) quotation on the
deadline for submission of quotations shall be sufficient to proceed with the
evaluation thereof. In no instance shall Procuring Entities be required to pay any
sum of money for the purpose of obtaining RFQs/RFPs.
For the procurement of requirements, i.e., space, booth design, booth
construction, in case of participation to international exhibits, duly approved by
authorized officials under existing laws, rules and regulation, Procuring Entities
may not be required to send RFQs/RFPs to at least three (3) suppliers,
contractors or consultants of known qualifications.
d. The BAC or the authorized personnel or committee may meet with all
prospective bidders, depending on the nature and complexity of the project, in
order to clarify and/or explain any of the requirements, terms, conditions, and
specifications stipulated in the RFQ/RFP.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Goods and Services,
Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services to be Procured
and Performed Overseas
Appendix 28
340
e. After the deadline for submission of quotations/proposals, an Abstract of
Quotations/Ratings shall be prepared setting forth the names of those who
responded to the RFQ/RFP, and their corresponding price quotations/ratings.
f. The BAC or the authorized personnel or committee shall recommend to the
HOPE the award of contract in favor of the supplier or contractor with the Single
or Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation (for goods or infrastructure
projects), or consultant with the Single or Highest Rated and Responsive
Proposal (for consulting services). In case of approval, the HOPE shall
immediately enter into contract with the winning supplier, contractor or
consultant. If permitted by the HOPE, the authorized personnel or committee
may award the contract in accordance with this paragraph.
5. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE
This Guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) calendar days after its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing
with the University of the Philippines Law Center.
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
341
APPENDIX 29
GUIDELINES AND CONDITIONS IN THE RECOGNITION OF GPPB PROCUREMENT
TRAININGS OR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES PURSUANT TO SECTION
16 OF REPUBLIC ACT (RA) NO. 9184 AND ITS 2016 REVISED IMPLEMENTING
RULES AND REGULATIONS (IRR) AND THE RECOGNITION OF THE EXISTING
POOL OF PROCUREMENT TRAINERS404
1.0 PURPOSE
This Circular is issued to provide guidance on the conditions for the recognition of
procurement trainings or capacity development activities pursuant to Section 16 of
the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184, and to confer authority to the existing pool of
trainers of the Government Procurement Policy Board – Technical Support Office
(GPPB-TSO) to conduct procurement trainings.
2.0 SCOPE / COVERAGE
2.1 All Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government
including State Universities and Colleges, Government Owned and/or
Controlled Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, and Local
Government Units; and
2.2 All GPPB-TSO Recognized Trainers, who serve as Lectures, Resource
Persons and Speakers in Seminars, Training Programs and other similar
activities on RA 9184 and its revised IRR.
3.0 PROFESSIONALIZATION OF BAC, TWG MEMBERS AND PROCURING
UNITS
3.1 Pursuant to Section 16 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184, the GPPB shall
establish a sustained training program to develop the capability of the Bids
and Awards Committees (BACs), BAC Secretariats, Technical Working
Groups (TWGs), and the Procurement Units of Procuring Entities, and
professionalize the same.
3.2 The Head of the Procuring Entity (HoPE) shall ensure that the BAC, its
Secretariat and TWG members, including other relevant procurement
personnel are sent to attend procurement training or capacity development
program.
3.3 Within six (6) months upon designation, the BAC, its Secretariat and TWG
members should have satisfactorily completed such training or program
conducted, authorized or accredited by the GPPB through its TSO.
404 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 12-2018, dated 04 September 2018, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 20
March 2019.
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
342
4.0 PROCUREMENT TRAININGS OR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
THAT ARE RECOGNIZED BY GPBB
4.1 Provided that it shall meet the parameters set forth in this Circular, the
following are considered as training or capacity development activities by
GPPB:
4.1.1 Trainings conducted and organized by GPPB-TSO;
4.1.2 In-House Trainings conducted and organized by agencies, with
RPs from GPPB-TSO and/or from the pool of GPPB recognized
trainers;
4.1.3 Trainings conducted and organized by private organizations such
as PICPA, AGIA, PAGBA, PHILLBO, AGAP, etc. with RPs from
GPPB-TSO and/or pool of recognized trainers, ONLY for the
allocated time slot for procurement or procurement related topic;
4.1.4 Certification Course for Procurement Practitioners; and
4.1.5 Procurement eLearning Program.
5.0 CONDITIONS FOR THE RECOGNITION OF GPPB PROCUREMENT
TRAININGS OR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
5.1 A procurement training or capacity development activity is considered
recognized by GPPB pursuant to Section 16 of the 2016 revised IRR, if it
complies with the following conditions:
5.1.1 It must comprise a minimum of eight (8) hours of training,
accomplished at once or accumulated within six (6) months from
designation;
5.1.2 In case of in-house trainings organized and conducted by an
agency or a private organization:
5.1.2.1 The requesting agency or private organization must
send a formal letter requesting for Resource
Person/s to GPPB-TSO, addressed to its Executive
Director;
5.1.2.2 Should the requesting agency or private
organization have identified a resource speaker
from the pool of GPPB recognized trainers,
although this is strongly discouraged, the GPPBTSO must still be notified/informed in writing for
endorsement purposes;
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
343
5.1.2.3 The requesting agency or private organization must
conform to the procedure and timeline for request
for training as provided in GPPB-TSO’s Service
Charter; and
5.1.2.4 The agency or private organization must be able to
submit the following documents within three (3)
days after the conduct of training:
5.1.2.4.1 Post-training evaluation forms duly
accomplished by participants;
5.1.2.4.2 Accomplished Data Gathering Form;
5.1.2.4.3 Training coordination feedback form
duly accomplished by the training
committee or authorized personnel
of the requesting agency or private
organization; and
5.1.2.4.4 A copy of actual attendance sheet,
reflecting the full names,
designation, and contact details of
participants and certified true and
correct by the authorized personnel
requesting agency or private
organization.
5.1.3 In cases of participation in Certification/Diploma Courses or
Procurement eLearning Program:
5.1.3.1 The Certification or Diploma Course must be
enrolled with any of GPPB-TSO’s partner SUCs;
5.1.3.2 The eLearning platform must be maintained by
GPPB-TSO; and
5.1.3.3 Successful completion of all requirements in any
level of the course shall be sufficient compliance
with Section 16 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA
9184.
6.0 PROOFS OF COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 16 OF THE 2016 REVISED IRR
OF RA 9184
6.1 Any of the following may be presented as proof of participation and
completion of a minimum of eight (8) hours procurement training in
compliance with Section 16 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184:
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
344
6.1.1 Certificate of Participation issued by GPPB-TSO for procurement
trainings or capacity development activities organized and
conducted by GPPB-TSO, reflecting the date, venue of training
and the number of hours completed, which must be a minimum of
eight (8) training hours;
6.1.2 Certificate of Participation issued by requesting agency or private
organization for procurement trainings or capacity development
activities endorsed by GPPB-TSO, reflecting the date, venue of
training and the number of hours completed, which must be a
minimum of eight (8) training hours;
6.1.2.1 The Certificate need not be signed by GPPB-TSO or
its representative. Instead, the submission of
documents as enumerated under Section
5.1.2.4shall attest to the successful completion of
the procurement training by the procurement
practitioner.
6.1.3 Certificate of Completion, any level of the Procurement Course,
issued by any of the partner SUCs of GPPB-TSO, reflecting the
date, venue of training and the number of hours completed, which
must be a minimum of eight (8) training hours; and
6.1.4 Certificate of Completion, any level of the Procurement eLearning
Program issued by GPPB-TSO, reflecting the date of completion.
7.0 ePROCUREMENT eLEARNING PROGRAM AS RECOGNIZED CAPACITY
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY
7.1 The eLearning Procurement Training Platform is an alternative
training/learning option, which has the following objectives:
7.1.1 To provide a more convenient training platform accessible through
conventional computers, smart phones, tablets and other similar
gadgets, which aims to help users learn the basics of Philippine
procurement system in their own pace and schedule, wherever
they are; and
7.1.2 To provide a ready training platform that will always be available
and accessible to procurement practitioners, bidders, and other
interested stakeholders. This will likewise address the need for
procurement training for newly appointed procurement officers
due to reorganization of agencies’ procurement units.
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
345
7.2 Three Levels of the Procurement eLearning Program
7.2.1 Basic Level
The Basic Level must be completed in two (2) days from the date
of registration. It includes eight (8) modules and an objective type
of examination where the user must be able to obtain a passing
score. A Certificate of Completion shall be issued to users who
shall successfully complete the level. Completion of this level will
provide access to the succeeding levels.
Modules include:
i. History of Procurement Laws;
ii. Coverage, Scope and Application;
iii. Principles of Public Procurement;
iv. Procurement Organizations;
v. Roles and Responsibilities;
vi. Grant of Honoraria;
vii. Professionalization Program; and
viii. Procurement Methods.
An exam shall be provided towards the end of the Basic Level for
which a Certificate of Completion shall be issued to successful
users.
7.2.2 Intermediate Level
The Intermediate Level must be completed in three (3) days from
the date of completion of the Basic Level. At the end of the 3rd
day, the modules for this level shall no longer be accessed.
Modules include:
i. Procurement Planning and Monitoring:
a) Preparation of the Annual Procurement Plan (APP) and
Project Procurement Management Plan (PPMP); and
b) Preparation of the Procurement Monitoring Report
(PMR).
ii. Procurement Procedures for Goods and Infrastructure
Projects;
iii. Procurement Procedures for Consulting Services; and
iv. Alternative Modes of Procurement.
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
346
An exam shall be provided towards the end of the Intermediate
Level for which a Certificate of Completion shall be issued to
successful users.
7.2.3 Advanced Level
The Advanced Level must be completed in two (2) days from the
date of completion of the Intermediate Level. At the end of the
2nd day, the modules for this level shall no longer be accessed.
Modules include:
i. Philippine Bidding Documents for Goods and Services,
Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services;
ii. Contract Administration and Management; and
iii. Protest Mechanism, Penal, Civil and Administrative
Provisions, Blacklisting Guidelines.
An exam shall be provided towards the end of the Advanced Level
for which a Certificate of Completion shall be issued to successful
users.
7.3 Issuance of Certificate of Completion on Procurement eLearning Program
7.3.1 Upon completion of the Advanced Level, the user has the option
to take the final examinations, the coverage of which includes the
content of all three (3) levels. A passing score will entitle the user
a certificate of completion of the entire Procurement eLearning
Program.
8.0 RECOGNITION OF GPPB TRAINERS
8.1 The GPPB-TSO has an existing pool of recognized trainers who are tapped as
speakers/lecturers to conduct procurement trainings nationwide.
8.2 The GPPB-TSO trainers are recognized after having successfully completed
the Recruitment, Selection, Recognition and Retention Program of the GPPBTSO composed of the following stages:
8.1.1 Preliminary Screening against the Set Basic Requirements;
8.1.2 Training on RA 9184, its IRR, PBDs, and Assessment Exam;
8.1.3 Skills and Values Formation Training-Workshop and Evaluation of
Facilitation and Presentation Skills; and
8.1.4 Conduct of In-House Training.
Guidelines and Conditions in the Recognition of GPPB
Procurement Trainings or Capacity Development Activities
pursuant to Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
the Recognition of the Existing Pool of Procurement Trainers
Appendix 29
347
8.3 Due to the acquired expertise gained from years of experience, and the
extensive work and research on government procurement, the GPPBTSO
officials and staff, both past and present, shall be recognized trainers on
government procurement subject to compliance with the requirements of the
GPPB-TSO’s Recruitment, Selection, Recognition and Retention Program, or
such other requirements or compliance mechanism instituted by the GPPBTSO.
8.4 The GPPB shall recognize GPPB-TSO recognized trainers among the
authorized resource speakers/lecturers to be tapped and/or conduct
procurement trainings pursuant to Sections 4.1.2 and 4.1.3, upon satisfaction
of the following requirements:
8.4.1 Submission of Updated Profile Sheet;
8.4.2 Signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
Trainers and the GPPB Secretary, containing the following, among
others:
8.4.2.1 Minimum number of lectures per semester the
trainer should accommodate;
8.4.2.2 Prohibition on acceptance of training requests from
agencies and private organizations without proper
endorsement from GPPB-TSO;
8.4.2.3 Attendance and participation in Continuing
Education Program of the GPPB-TSO, if applicable,
and
8.4.2.4 Grant of Honoraria shall be subject to existing
budgeting and auditing rules and regulations.
8.5 The GPPB-TSO shall maintain an updated list of recognized GPPB Trainers in
its website.
9.0 This Circular shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following the publication in the
Official Gazette or a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing
with the University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified true copies of
this Resolution.
10.0 For guidance and compliance.
Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement
of Common-Use Supply and Equipment
Appendix 30
348
APPENDIX 30
GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF THE VIRTUAL STORE FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
COMMON-USE SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT 405
1. Policy Statement
1.1 It has been the policy of the government to promote transparency and
efficiency, and use of information and communications technology in the
conduct of procurement. Accordingly, Section 8 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184
and Section 8.1.1 of the 2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations
(IRR), the Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS)
shall serve as the primary and definitive source of information on government
procurement.
1.2 Section 8.1.2 of the revised IRR further provides that in order to take
advantage of the significant built-in efficiencies of the PhilGEPS and the volume
discounts inherent in bulk purchasing, all Procuring Entities shall utilize the
PhilGEPS for the procurement of Common-Use Supplies and Equipment (CSE).
Moreover, Section 8.2.4.1 thereof authorizes the ordering of common-use and
non-common use items online through a virtual store feature of the PhilGEPS.
1.3 In furtherance of these objectives, the PhilGEPS was upgraded to adapt to the
developments in modern technology and to improve its responsiveness to the
needs of all procurement stakeholders through the introduction of the
Modernized PhilGEPS (mPhilGEPS) project.
2. Scope
2.1. This Guidelines shall apply to the procurement of CSEs from the Virtual Store
by all departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of all branches in
the government, including state universities and colleges (SUCs), governmentowned or controlled corporations (GOCCs), government financial institutions
(GFIs), and local government units (LGUs) in the procurement of CSEs included
in the Electronic Catalogue.
2.2. The GPPB shall promulgate separate guidelines for the procurement of NonCommon Use Supplies and Equipment from the Virtual Store once the
mPhilGEPS functionality for this purpose has been developed.
3. Definition of Terms
For purposes of this Guidelines, the following terms words and phrases shall mean or
be understood as follows:
3.1 Agency – refers to departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of all
branches in the government, including SUCs, GOCCs, GFIs, and LGUs.
405 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 20-2018, dated 18 October 2018, published in the Philippine Daily Inquirer on 4 May
2019.
Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement
of Common-Use Supply and Equipment
Appendix 30
349
3.2 Annual Procurement Plan-Common-Use Supplies and Equipment
(APP-CSE) – refers to the yearly requirements of an Agency for CSEs
approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) or his/her duly
authorized representative.
3.3 Allowable Area – within Metro Manila and provinces within a 35-kilometer
radius from the Procurement Service (PS) – Main Office.
3.4 Agency Buyer/s – refers to the person/s authorized by the Agency to be
responsible for procuring CSEs from the Virtual Store.
3.5 APP-CSE Approver – refers to the person authorized by the Agency to be
responsible for approving the APP-CSE uploaded in the Virtual Store.
3.6 APP-CSE Uploader – refers to the person authorized by the Agency to be
responsible for uploading the APP-CSE and editing the details of the APP-CSE in
the mPhilGEPS.
3.7 Common-Use Supplies and Equipment – refers to goods, materials, and
equipment that are used in the day-to-day operations of Agencies in the
performance of their functions and included in the Electronic Catalogue of the
mPhilGEPS.
3.8 Depot – refers to the warehouse facilities of the PS that physically receives,
stores, and distributes CSEs.
3.9 Electronic Catalogue – refers to the feature of the mPhilGEPS that shows an
online list of CSE items available in the PS.
3.10 Electronic Wallet (eWallet) – refers to the online service that allows
Agencies to pay for CSEs procured from the Virtual Store using a unique
number created in the Virtual Store System and assigned to an Agency upon
registration.
3.11 eWallet Balance – refers to the available cash remitted in advance by the
Agency to PS for the procurement of CSEs.
3.12 Non-common Use Supplies and Equipment – refers to goods, materials,
and equipment that are not CSEs, and may include goods, materials and
equipment that are required by an Agency fora specific project only.
3.13 Notice of Cash Allocation (NCA) – refers to the Cash authority issued by
the DBM to central, regional and provincial offices and other operating units
through the authorized government servicing banks of the Modified
Disbursement Scheme, to cover the cash requirements of the Agencies.
3.14 Virtual Store – refers to the online service of the mPhilGEPS that allows
Agencies to view, search, select, and procure CSEs.
Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement
of Common-Use Supply and Equipment
Appendix 30
350
4. Mandatory Use of the Virtual Store
All Agencies are mandated to fully use the mPhilGEPS for the procurement of CSEs
through its Virtual Store feature in accordance with Section 8 of the revised IRR of RA
No. 9184.
5. Requirements before Using the Virtual Store
5.1. Agencies shall register with the Virtual Store by filling out the Virtual Store
Buyer Registration Form to be provided by the PS, which shall be signed by the
HOPE or his/her authorized representative.
The person designated as the APP-CSE Uploader may also be designated as an
Agency Buyer. However, the person designated as the APP-CSE Approver shall
not be designated as either the Agency Buyer or the APP-CSE Uploader.
5.2. Agencies shall upload their approved APP-CSE in the mPhilGEPS, which shall be
the basis of procurement from the Virtual Store. Once uploaded, the APP-CSE
shall be the basis of the PS in forecasting CSE demands for the applicable
budget year.
The authorized APP-CSE Uploader shall upload in the mPhilGEPS the approved
APP-CSE for the succeeding budget year not later than 31 August of the
current year in accordance with the format prescribed by the PS.
5.3. Any amendments to the uploaded APP-CSE may only be made by the APP-CSE
Uploader and shall be consistent with the Agency’s duly approved yearly
budget. The approval of the APP-CSE Approver is needed before the Agency
Buyer can procure based on the revised items and/or quantities.
5.4. The PS shall create an eWallet for the Agencies for the purpose of depositing
funds, which shall be used to pay for the CSEs procured from the Virtual Store.
5.4.1. Agencies shall initially deposit cash funds equivalent to three (3)
months of their APP-CSE, whether allocated for the Maintenance and
Other Operating Expenses or the Capital Outlay, to a single fund in
the PS against which payment for CSEs procured through the Virtual
Store will be charged.
Cash funds may be deposited through the PS cashier or over the
counter at PS accredited banks, until interbank transfer is mandated.
5.4.2. Agencies shall maintain an eWallet Balance with the PS amounting to
at least eight percent (8%) of its allocated budget for CSEs for the
budget year.
Agencies shall remit to PS, within five (5) working days from receipt
of NCA, the amount equivalent to the eWallet Balance required
herein.
Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement
of Common-Use Supply and Equipment
Appendix 30
351
5.4.3. The PS shall automatically return to the Agencies the unexpended
amount of the eWallet Balance at the end of the fiscal year.
5.4.4. Agencies shall be responsible for ensuring that the use of funds for
procurement through the Virtual Store are in accordance with
existing budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations.
6. Procurement through Virtual Store
6.1 Agencies can only procure CSEs in accordance with the items and quantities
indicated in their uploaded APP-CSE. Only the authorized Agency Buyer/s can
procure CSEs from the Virtual Store.
Upon confirmation of the order, the Virtual Store shall send an electronic mail
confirming the order to the Agency Buyer who placed the order.
6.2 CSEs that are not currently available from the assigned Depot may then be
procured from sources other than the Virtual Store without the need of
securing the Certificate of Non availability of Stocks (CNAS), subject to the
following:406
a. The item is not available from the DBM-PS, as shown on its website; and
b. Procuring Entities shall keep a record of the proof of unavailability of the
CSE as shown in the PS website, such as a printed form of the webpage or a
screenshot of the same showing the date and time that it was accessed.
6.3 The PS shall have a user help desk which offers support through a hotline to
solve problems Agencies may face during their online order operations. The PS
shall likewise provide a kiosk for walk-in Agencies for the purpose of procuring
from the Virtual Store.
7. Payment
7.1. The Virtual Store will automatically draw down from the eWallet and update
the eWallet Balance upon order confirmation.
In the event that the eWallet Balance is insufficient to cover the amount of the
CSEs to be procured, the Virtual Store will automatically reject the order.
8. Delivery and Acceptance
8.1. CSEs procured from the Virtual Store may be obtained within a specific number
of days as determined by PS through any of the following modes:
8.1.1. Pick-up from PS warehouse or Depots – the Agency arranges for its
own transportation to pick-up the procured CSEs from the PS
warehouse or Depot. Agencies identified by a Depot as located in a
remote or geographically isolated area are allowed to specify a pickup date longer than the period allowed by the PS.
406 As amended by GPPB Resolution No. 17-2020, dated 18 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September
202.
Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement
of Common-Use Supply and Equipment
Appendix 30
352
8.1.2. Delivery by the PS – The PS dispatches its own delivery vehicles to
the Agency’s registered delivery location, if within the allowable area.
8.1.3. Delivery through the PS forwarders – The PS directs any of its
forwarders to deliver to the Agency’s registered delivery location, if
within the allowable area.
8.1.4. Direct delivery by Supplier – The PS instructs the supplier to directly
deliver to the Agency’s registered delivery location, if within the
allowable area.
8.2. For all deliveries, the agency shall designate an official “Drop Point” located at
the ground floor of the office building or storage area where ordered goods will
be delivered and unloaded.
8.3. In case of pickup under Section 8.1.1, inspection shall be conducted by the
Agency’s authorized representative as to the correctness of the item ordered
and quantity prior to release.
8.4. In the case of deliveries under Sections 8.1.2 to 8.1.4, inspection shall be
conducted by the Agency’s authorized representative as to the correctness of
the item/s ordered and quantity upon delivery to the Agency’s registered
delivery location.
8.5. In all instances of delivery, the Agency’s authorized representative shall sign a
Delivery Receipt acknowledging that the item /s and quantity is the same as
that procured in the Virtual Store. In case of shortages, the agency shall notify
PS the discrepancy in the Delivery Receipt. Upon notification, the PS shall then
deliver to complete the order.
8.6. Return of CSEs procured, whether due to defects or error committed by the
Agency in selecting the item or such other acceptable reason, shall comply with
the PS return policies and procedure.
9. Issues for Resolution
The interpretation of the provisions in this Guidelines, including cases not covered
herein, shall be submitted to the PS for resolution of the GPPB or its Technical Support
Office.
10. Separability Clause
If, for any reason, any part or provision of this Guidelines is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, any part or provision not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.
11. Repealing Clause
All issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Guidelines are
hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement
of Common-Use Supply and Equipment
Appendix 30
353
12. Effectivity
This Guidelines shall take effect immediately upon publication in the Official Gazette or
in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation.
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
354
APPENDIX 31
GUIDELINES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF EARLY PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES
(EPA) 407
1. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
1.1 The Guidelines on Early Procurement Activities shall apply to Departments,
Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government including State
Universities and Colleges, Government-owned and/or Controlled Corporations
(GOCCs), Government Financial Institutions, and Local Government Units
(LGUs).
1.2 This Guidelines shall cover all types of procurement for goods, infrastructure
projects and consulting services funded out of or by the General Appropriations
Act (GAA), appropriations ordinance, corporate budget, or loan agreement in
case of Foreign-Assisted Projects (FAPs).
1.3 A Procurement Project shall refer to a specific or identified procurement
covering goods, infrastructure project or consulting services. A Procurement
Project shall be described, detailed, and scheduled in the Project Procurement
Management Plan prepared by the agency which shall be consolidated in the
procuring entity's Annual Procurement Plan (APP).
1.4 EPA is applicable for Procurement Projects undertaken through Competitive
Bidding and Alternative Methods of Procurement, except for the following:
1.4.1 Repeat Order (Sec. 51);
1.4.2 Shopping (Sec. 52);
1.4.3 Negotiated Procurement- Emergency Cases (Sec. 53.2);
1.4.4 Negotiated Procurement- Take-Over of Contracts (Section 53.3); and
1.4.5 Negotiated Procurement - Small Value Procurement (Sec. 53.9).
1.5 Procurement Projects to be funded from lump-sum funds in the National
Expenditure Program (NEP) wherein the recipients and the corresponding
amounts have not been identified or approved, such as contingent funds, are
excluded from the conduct of EPA, except those to be funded from:
1.5.1 the Local Government Support Fund administered by the Department
of Interior and Local Government; and
1.5.2 the Budgetary Support to Government Corporations administered by
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).
2. PREPARATORY ACTIVITIES
2.1 The procuring entity (PE) shall complete all the appropriate preparatory
activities such as, but not limited to, cost-benefit analysis, feasibility studies,
market research, and detailed engineering designs, regulatory clearances and
right of way acquisitions for civil works projects prior to the approval of the
indicative APP.
407 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 14-2019, dated 17 July 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 26 August 2019.
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
355
2.2 The indicative APP must be duly approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity
(HoPE) and submitted to:
2.2.1 the DBM in case of national government agencies and GOCCs;
2.2.2 the respective governing boards for further approval in case of
GOCCs under the Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG) and
submission to the latter; or
2.2.3 the Sanggunian in case of LGUs.
2.3 The indicative APP shall be posted on the agency’s Transparency Seal pursuant
to DBM Circular Letter No. 2018- 8 dated 30 July 2018.
2.4 As clarified under Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) Circular
052018 dated 18 May 2018, the Certificate of Availability of Funds shall not be
required prior to the commencement of EPA.
2.5 The PE shall expressly provide in the bidding documents and through PhilGEPS
posting that the Procurement Project is undertaken through EPA. The PE shall
likewise ensure that the prospective bidders are properly informed, through the
bidding documents and during the pre-bid conference, of all the implications of
a Procurement Project undertaken through EPA. This shall include, but not
limited to the:
2.5.1 rules and procedure of EPA;
2.5.2 fixed price rule in procurement;
2.5.3 extension of the bid validity and security;
2.5.4 validity of the eligibility requirements prior to the award of contract;
2.5.5 conditions of award; and
2.5.6 date of earliest delivery.
3. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES
3.1 EPA shall refer to the conduct of procurement activities, from posting of the
procurement opportunity, if required, until recommendation of the Bids and
Awards Committee (BAC) to the HoPE as to the award of the contract, for
goods to be delivered, infrastructure projects to be implemented and
consulting services to be rendered in the following fiscal year, pending
approval of their respective funding sources.
3.2 The award of contract for Procurement Projects undertaken through EPA may
be made only upon:
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
356
3.2.1 approval and effectivity of their respective funding sources, to wit:
(i) GAA; (ii) Corporate Budget; (iii) Appropriations Ordinance; or
(iv) loan agreement in the case of FAPs; or
3.2.2 the reenactment of the previous year’s budget which constitutes
the current year’s authorized budget, when authorized by the
Constitution, law or rules.
3.3 PEs are encouraged to undertake EPA to ensure the timely delivery of goods,
implementation of infrastructure projects and rendition of consultancy services.
3.3.1 The conduct of EPA for nationally-funded Procurement Projects may
commence as early as the submission of the NEP to Congress,
usually in July. No EPA may be conducted without an indicative
APP duly approved by the HoPE and the Multi-Year Contracting
Authority (MYCA) issued by the DBM, in the case of multi-year
projects.
3.3.2 For Procurement Projects funded by corporate and local funds, the
EPA may be undertaken from the time the proposed corporate or
local budget has been submitted to the approving authority.
3.3.3 In the case of Foreign-Assisted Projects, the same may commence:
3.3.3.1 from the approval of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) Board as evidenced by
the official notice of approval issued by the NEDA
Secretariat to the implementing agency; or
3.3.3.2 upon issuance of a document or instrument issued by
the foreign donor or financing institution explicitly
stating that a loan is to be made available to the
Philippines, usually through the Department of
Finance, or any of its agencies or instrumentalities
with borrowing authority pending final approval of the
loan.
3.4 Rules for Procurement Projects to be funded from a Source Agency and
Implemented by a Recipient Agency.
3.4.1 For Procurement Projects that are included in the budget of an
agency (source agency) but shall be released directly to another
agency (recipient agency) pursuant to a special provision in the
NEP, the special provision shall be the basis of the recipient agency
to conduct EPA.
Such projects shall be included in the indicative APP of the recipient
agency.
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
357
For example:
Funds for the Basic Educational Facilities project under the
Department of Education (DepEd) but is directly released to the
Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), which shall
implement the project. Funds for the Farm-to-Market Road Projects
of the Department of Agriculture also directly released to the
DPWH, which shall implement the project.
3.4.2 For Procurement Projects funded in the budget of an agency
(source agency) but to be implemented by another agency
(recipient agency), a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
between them shall be the basis of the recipient agency for the
conduct of EPA. The MOU shall state that the source agency:
3.4.2.1 has proposed funds in the NEP for a Procurement
Project;
3.4.2.2 identifies the recipient agency as the implementing
unit for the said Procurement Project; and
3.4.2.3 authorizes the recipient agency to undertake EPA for
the said Procurement Project.
Such Procurement Projects shall be included in the indicative APP of
the recipient agency.
The MOU required above is limited to the conduct of EPA and is
different from the Memorandum of Agreement that may be
required for the actual implementation of the Procurement Project
under a special or general provision in the GAA, rules of the source
or recipient agency, or budgeting, accounting and auditing rules
and regulations.
3.4.3 For Procurement Projects funded by forthcoming sub-allotments
from the Central Office (CO) or Centrally-Managed Items, the
written approval, in whatever form, from the CO identifying the
implementing unit therefor with the corresponding amount and
authorizing the conduct EPA shall be the basis for the conduct of
said activity.
3.5 The source and recipient agencies shall ensure that any and all conditions or
documents required to be met or submitted as a prerequisite for the release of
funds or sub-allotment thereof shall be timely prepared to enable the
implementing agency to award the contract within the prescribed period.
4. BID VALIDITY
The PE may request the bidders to extend the validity of their bid securities beyond
one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, prior to their expiration, if the funding
source for the Procurement Project has yet to be approved and made effective.
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
358
A change in the form of the bid security is allowed if this is made prior to the
expiration of the bid validity sought to be extended.
If the bidder refuses to extend the bid validity, the PE shall reject the bid submitted by
said bidder.
5. PROCUREMENT TIMELINES
The conduct of EPA from posting to recommendation of the BAC to the HoPE as to the
award of the contract shall observe the mandatory timelines set forth in the 2016
revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. (RA) No. 9184,
including the period for re-bidding which shall be within fifteen (15) days after each
declaration of failure of bidding, which may be extended up to thirty (30) days upon
approval of the HoPE.
6. REVISION OF THE INDICATIVE APP BEFORE AWARD OF CONTRACT
6.1 As soon as the funding source for the Procurement Project has been approved,
regardless of the stage of the EPA, the indicative APP shall be revised and
approved in accordance with Section 7.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No.
9184.
6.2 Upon approval of the APP and the commencement of the running of the period
to award the contract and complete the procurement process, the HoPE may
approve or disapprove the recommendation of the BAC.
In case of approval, the HoPE shall issue the Notice of Award to the Lowest
Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated Responsive Bid, as the case may
be, and thereafter sign the contract.
In case of disapproval, the HoPE shall notify the BAC and the bidder in writing
of such decision and the grounds thereof which shall be any of the grounds
provided for under Section 41 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
6.3 The final approved APP shall be submitted to the GPPB on or before the end of
January of the budget year, and shall be posted in accordance with Executive
Order No. 662, series of 2007, as amended (refer to Appendix 1 for the revised
APP form for the conduct of EPA).
7. AWARD OF CONTRACT
7.1 Notwithstanding the mandatory procurement timelines provided in Section 37
of RA No. 9184, Procurement Projects undertaken through EPA may be
awarded upon approval and effectivity of the GAA, reenacted budget,
appropriations ordinance, corporate budget or loan agreement, as the case
may be.
For example:
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
359
Agency A’s Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC)for its procurement of
heavy-duty shredders is 1 Million Pesos as authorized in the NEP and after
undertaking EPA the contract price to be awarded amounts to 1 Million Pesos,
Agency A may award the contract upon approval and effectivity of the GAA.
However, in the case of a reenacted budget, the PE may only award the
contract for Recurring Procurement Projects and not for new Procurement
Projects. Recurring Procurement Projects shall refer to Procurement Projects
included in the previous year’s budget which has been reenacted in or for the
current year.
7.2 If the amount authorized for a Procurement Project has been reduced, the PE
may still make an award if the contract price to be awarded is within the
amount authorized in the GAA, reenacted budget, appropriations ordinance,
corporate budget, or loan agreement regardless of the posted ABC.
For example:
Agency A’s ABC for its procurement of printers is 1.2 Million Pesos as
authorized in the NEP and after undertaking EPA the contract price to be
awarded is1 Million Pesos. If the budget is reduced to 1 Million Pesos, Agency
A may award the contract because the contract price to be awarded is within
the amount authorized.
7.3 The HoPE shall not award any Procurement Project if the amount therefor has
been withdrawn or in the event the amount authorized in the GAA, reenacted
budget, appropriations ordinance, corporate budget, or loan agreement is
lower than the amount of contract to be awarded.
For example:
a. Agency A’s ABC for its procurement of LED lighting system for its
auditorium is 1.5 Million Pesos as authorized in the NEP and after
undertaking EPA the contract price to be awarded is 1.3 Million Pesos. If
the budget is withdrawn, Agency A shall NOT award the contract
pursuant to Sec. 41(c) (iii) of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
b. Agency A’s ABC for its procurement of desktop computers is 1 Million
Pesos as authorized in the NEP and after undertaking EPA the contract
price to be awarded is PhP 900,000. If the budget is reduced to PhP
800,000, Agency A shall NOT award the contract pursuant to Sec. 41(c)
(iii) of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
7.4 In all instances, the HoPE has the authority to exercise the reservation clause
under Section 41 of RA No. 9184, which grants the HoPE the right not to award
the contract if, for any justifiable and reasonable ground, the award of the
contract will not redound to the benefit of the government.
7.5 Notwithstanding the approval and effectivity of the GAA, reenacted budget,
appropriations ordinance, corporate budget or loan agreement, as the case
may be, PEs shall not award contracts for Procurement Projects requiring
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
360
Special Allotment Release Order or Sub-Allotment Release Order until the same
has been issued, secured or released.
8. TOLLING OR SUSPENSION OF THE PERIOD
8.1. Pursuant to Section 85 of Presidential Decree No. 1445 or the State Audit Code,
no contract involving the expenditure of public funds shall be entered into
unless there is an appropriation. Accordingly, pending approval and effectivity
of the GAA, corporate budget or appropriations ordinance, or the loan
agreement in the case of FAPs, the following periods shall be tolled or
suspended:
8.1.1 the fifteen-day (15 day) period for the HoPE to approve the
Resolution of the BAC and to issue the Notice of Award provided
under Section 37; and
8.1.2 the three-month (3-month) period within which to complete the
procurement process, from the opening of bids up to the award of
contract, under Section 38 of RA No. 9184.
8.2. The period of time for the award of contract and termination of the
procurement process, as the case may be, shall begin to run again upon the
approval and effectivity of the GAA, reenacted budget, appropriations
ordinance, corporate budget or loan agreement, as the case may be.
It shall not commence anew but rather, grants the HoPE the balance of the
remaining period to award the contract or terminate the procurement process.
For example:
The BAC conducted the Bid Opening on 30 July and the BAC issued a
Resolution recommending award of the contract on 11 October.
The 3-month period to complete the procurement process and the 15-day
period for the HoPE to approve the contract are suspended beginning 12
October.
The HoPE has seventeen (17) days to complete the procurement process from
the approval and effectivity of the funding source. This is the period remaining
from the 3-month period to complete the procurement process, i.e., 90 days
less 73 days (or the period covering July 30 to October 11).
If the approval and effectivity of the GAA is 1 January, the 3month period to
complete the procurement process and the 15day period for the HoPE to
approve the contract shall run again and the HoPE has (i) 15 days or until 16
January to award; and (ii) 17 days or until 18 January to complete the
procurement process.
Guidelines on the Implementation of Early Procurement
Activities (EPA)
Appendix 31
361
9. MONITORING
9.1 Annual Procurement Plan.
Projects undertaken through EPA shall be reported in the APP under a column
separate from the regular procurement activities (refer to Appendix 1 for the
revised APP form for the conduct of EPA).
9.2 Procurement Monitoring Report.
Awards made under EPA shall be reported in the Procurement Monitoring
Report (PMR) under a column separate from the regular procurement activities
(refer to Appendix 2 for the revised PMR form for the conduct of EPA).
9.3 Agency Procurement Compliance and Performance Indicators (APCPI).
Under Indicator 9 on Compliance with Procurement Timeframes under Pillar III
of the APCPI, the PE’s compliance shall be adjusted considering the tolling of
the periods as allowed.
10. EFFECTIVITY
This Circular shall take effect immediately.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
362
APPENDIX 32
GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT BY ALL PROCURING
ENTITIES 408
1. PURPOSE
This Guidelines shall prescribe the rules for the use of Framework Agreement,
including the procedure in the conduct of public bidding that will be subject of
Framework Agreement.
2. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
2.1 This Guidelines shall govern the use of Framework Agreement by all
departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies of the national government,
government owned or controlled corporations, government financial
institutions, state universities and colleges, and local government units.
2.2 Procuring entities may use Framework Agreement, as a contractual
arrangement, in the procurement of goods and services as defined under
Section 5(h) and 5(r) of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and the revised
Implementing Rules and Regulation (IRR), respectively.
2.3 Framework agreement may be utilized by procuring entities in the following:
2.2.1 for the procurement of goods and services which are repeatedly
required but by their nature, use, or characteristic, the quantity or
exact time of need cannot be accurately predetermined; and
2.2.2 for the procurement of goods which are not advisable to be carried
in stock.
3. DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1 Call-Off. Refers to a specific procurement request or order made by the
procuring entity exercising the option and requiring a supplier or service
provider to deliver the goods or render the services agreed upon under the
terms of the Framework Agreement.
3.2 Call for Mini Competition. Refers to a written request from the procuring
entity inviting all parties to a multi-year Framework Agreement to submit their
best price proposal for items or services subject of Mini Competition.
3.3 Framework Agreement. Refers to a written agreement between a procuring
entity and a supplier or service provider that identifies the terms and
conditions, under which specific purchases, otherwise known as “Call-Offs”, are
made for the duration of the agreement.
408 Issued through GPPB Resolution No. 27-2019, dated 10 December 2019, published in the Official Gazette on 30 December
2019, and superseded the Revised Guidelines on Ordering Agreement.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
363
The Framework Agreement is in the nature of an option contract between the
procuring entity and the bidder(s) granting the procuring entity the option to
either place an order for any of the goods or services identified in the
Framework Agreement List or not buy at all, within a minimum period of one
(1) year to a maximum period of three (3) years. The Framework Agreement
shall have a fixed period of either one (1), two (2) or three (3) year(s).
3.4 Framework Agreement List. Refers to the list of goods or services, and their
corresponding technical specifications, scope of work, projected quantities, and
estimated prices, subject of the Framework Agreement.
This shall be limited to repeatedly required goods or services that are identified
to be necessary and desirable, but, by its nature, use, or characteristic, the
quantity and/or exact time of need cannot be accurately pre-determined and
are not advisable to be carried in stock.
3.5 Mini Competition. Refers to the process by which the parties to a multiyear Framework Agreement bid as to their lowest price, prior to the issuance of
a Call-Off by the procuring entity.
3.6 Multi-Year Contracting Authority (MYCA). Refers to the document issued
by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) either for locally-funded
projects or foreign-assisted projects authorizing agencies to undertake the
procurement of multi-year projects for the full project cost.
3.7 Performance Securing Declaration. The Performance Securing Declaration
is an undertaking which states, among others, that the bidder shall guarantee
its faithful performance of the obligations under the Framework Agreement and
that it will be automatically disqualified from bidding of any procurement
contract of any Procuring Entity for a period of one (1) year for the first offense
or two (2) years for the second offense, upon receipt of the Blacklisting
Order409 in the event it violates any of the conditions stated in the Framework
Agreement.
4. GENERAL CONDITIONS
4.1 Procuring entities may use Framework Agreement if the Bids and Awards
Committee (BAC) determines that entering in a Framework Agreement is more
practical, economical, and advantageous for the procuring entity, based on the
study or evaluation conducted by the end-user unit representative showing
that:
4.1.1 Efficiency in procurement is attained as repetitive conduct of
procurement or the occasions of failures of biddings are minimized;
4.1.2 Stockholding or warehousing of goods and the costs and risks
accompanying it will be significantly reduced or avoided;
409 Item 4.2 of the Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors and Consultants
issued through GPPB Resolution No. 40-2017, dated 21 December 2017, published in the Official Gazette on 20 August 2017.
As amended by GPPB Resolution 16-2020, dated 16 September 2020, published in the Philippine Star on 26 September 2020.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
364
4.1.3 Incurrence of additional cost will be lessened as the possibility of
delay in the acquisition of the goods or services is minimized;
4.1.4 The commitment by the supplier or service provider to immediately
deliver at short notice will translate to a more efficient means of
supplying goods and services;
4.1.5 Procuring entity will benefit from the fixed price or lower price for
the duration of the Framework Agreement;
4.1.6 Call-Offs at the time of actual need will result in the optimum usage
of the ABC; or
4.1.7 The benefits and advantages of lean and just-in-time procurements
are achieved.
4.2 The procurement of goods and services under a Framework Agreement shall
be conducted following the procedure for competitive bidding provided in RA
No. 9184 and its revised IRR, subject to Item 6 of this Guidelines.
5. FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS
A special facility on electronic Framework Agreement system shall be developed,
subject to the approval of the GPPB.
6. PROCUREMENT PLANNING
6.1 The Framework Agreement List shall be prepared in the most practical and
efficient manner that will encourage participation and competition among
interested suppliers or service providers in the relevant industry. The
Framework Agreement List shall be prepared taking into consideration the
following:
6.1.1 End-user unit’s determination that the goods or services to be
included in the Framework Agreement List are necessary and
desirable for the operations of the procuring entity, supported by a
document establishing the need for the acquisition of the goods in
the Framework Agreement List, such as, but not limited to
historical data, needs analysis, or market study establishing the
Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) for each of the goods in
the Framework Agreement List including budgetary allotments per
type of product or service.
6.1.2 The maximum quantity of items or services to be indicated in the
Framework Agreement List shall be determined based on the
expected number or outputs to be required by the procuring entity
should the need arises. The maximum quantity shall be considered
as the maximum quantity allowed to be purchased by the procuring
entity, which the supplier or service provider is bound to deliver or
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
365
perform pursuant to the Call-Off or aggregate of all the Call-offs
issued for the purpose.
6.1.3 The Framework Agreement List shall indicate the following
information:
6.1.3.1 Type and nature of each item or service;
6.1.3.2 Technical Specifications or Scope of Work;
6.1.3.3 Maximum quantity of items or services;
6.1.3.4 Estimated cost per item or service;
6.1.3.5 Total ABC including budgetary allotments per type of
product or service;
6.1.3.6 Expected delivery timeframe after receipt of a Call-Off;
and
6.1.3.7 Other appropriate information as may be necessary.
6.1.4 The cost per item or service shall be determined and prepared after
careful consideration of variables and factors that may affect future
market prices using, whenever applicable, historical data, market
study, feasibility study, net present value of money, foreign
exchange rate, inflation rate, cost of money, assessment of Total
Cost of Ownership, Life Cycle Costing and Value for Money analysis
taking into consideration the timeframe and period for the
implementation of the Framework Agreement.
6.1.5 Based on the results of market study and procurement planning,
the BAC may identify different procurement projects for a given
fiscal year that will adopt Framework Agreement as a contractual
arrangement. Each procurement project shall have a separate
Framework Agreement List as the latter is specific to a particular
procurement project.
6.2 No procurement shall be undertaken under this Guidelines unless the same is
in accordance with the Annual Procurement Plan (APP) and the Project
Procurement Management Plan (PPMP) prepared by the procuring entity. The
procuring entity, in the preparation of its APP, shall include procurement
projects that will be subjected to Framework Agreements, and attach all
Framework Agreement Lists as part of the APP.
6.3 In the event a MYCA or equivalent document is necessary to support a
contractual obligation on a multi-year basis, the procuring entity should secure
such document from the relevant government authority before commencement
of the relevant procurement activity in compliance with applicable law, rules,
circulars and issuances.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
366
The issuance of MYCA shall be subject to existing budgeting and auditing rules
and regulations.
7. COMPETITIVE BIDDING
7.1 The procuring entity shall conduct competitive bidding using a single stage,
two-envelope procedure as prescribed in Sections 23 and 25 of RA No. 9184
and its revised IRR. For this purpose, the procuring entity, through its BAC,
shall prepare, separate technical specifications or scope of work for every item
to be bidded out and indicate, among others, total cost for each item, the
maximum quantity it may procure when needed, and the requested delivery or
performance lead time from issuance of the Call-Off or from any date
determined by the procuring entity.
7.2 The Invitation to Bid shall indicate that the procurement will be subject to a
Framework Agreement pursuant to this Guidelines, and shall state whether the
Framework Agreement is for a single or multi-year Framework Agreement.
7.3 For multi-year Framework Agreement, the ABC for the first year shall be the
basis in computing for the required amount of the single largest completed
contract, net financial contracting capacity, bid security, bidding documents fee
and protest fee.
7.4 The procedure and requirements for Competitive Bidding provided in RA No.
9184 and its revised IRR shall apply while the Lowest Calculated and
Responsive Bidder (LCRB) shall be determined as follows:
7.4.1 For single-year Framework Agreement. If the Framework
Agreement is for a duration of one (1) year, outright determination
of the LCRB shall be conducted by the BAC and the
recommendation to enter into a Framework Agreement with the
LCRB shall be submitted to the HoPE. Upon receipt of the BAC
recommendation, the HoPE shall award the option contract in the
form of a Notice to Execute Framework Agreement to the bidder
with the LCRB. This notwithstanding, actual purchase of the
procuring entity shall only be made upon issuance of Call-Off;
7.4.2 For multi-year Framework Agreement. When the Framework
Agreement is for a duration of two (2) to three (3) years, the
bidders shall make initial submission of their eligibility requirements
and financial bid offer and the BAC shall make an initial
determination of the eligibility and the compliance of bidders with
the technical and financial aspects of the project. The BAC shall
then recommend the execution of a Framework Agreement among
the eligible, technically and financially compliant bidders and the
procuring entity. The HoPE shall then issue a Notice to Execute a
Framework Agreement to all complying bidders. The determination
of the LCRB shall not be performed by the BAC until a MiniCompetition is conducted among the bidders which were earlier
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
367
determined to be eligible and compliant with the technical and
financial aspects of the project. When Call for Mini Competition is
made, the BAC shall allow the bidders to submit their best financial
proposals on such pre-scheduled date, time and place, to
determine the bidder with the LCRB; and
7.4.3 Single Calculated and Responsive Bid (SCRB). A SCRB shall be
considered for award in accordance with Section 36 of the 2016
revised IRR of RA No. 9184; however, if the procurement is for a
multi-year framework agreement and only one (1) passed the
preliminary examination or evaluation, the multi-year Framework
Agreement shall be converted to a single-year Framework
Agreement.
7.5 Prices quoted by the bidder must be within the total cost per item as provided
in the Framework Agreement List. Financial bid offer that provides price
quotations that exceeds the total cost per item shall be automatically
disqualified.
8. FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT
8.1 Within ten (10) calendar days from receipt by the participating bidder(s) of the
Notification to Execute a Framework Agreement with the procuring entity, the
bidder or its duly authorized representative shall formally enter into a
Framework Agreement with the procuring entity for an amount of One Peso
(Php 1.00) to be paid by the procuring entity as a consideration for the option
granted to the procuring entity to procure the items in the Framework
Agreement List when the need arises.
8.2 Framework Agreements shall include the following: (a) Framework Agreement
List; (b) a provision that the perfection of the actual procurement contract shall
be reckoned from the execution of the Call-Offs; and (c) statement that upon
the execution of the Call-Offs, all rules and guidelines governing
implementation of procurement contracts under RA No. 9184 and its revised
IRR shall be applicable.
8.3 Prices indicated in the Framework Agreement corresponding to the subject
goods or services in the Framework Agreement List shall be fixed price per
item or identified service. For a single-year Framework Agreement, the price
shall be based on the actual bid price of the bidder, while for a multi-year
Framework Agreement, it shall be based on the price offered in the Mini
Competition.
8.4 Framework Agreements shall not state or imply any agreement by the
procuring entity to place future contracts or make orders with the supplier or
service provider.
8.5 No modification of the Framework Agreement during its period shall be
allowed.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
368
8.6 Framework Agreements shall be valid only for the period stated in the bidding
documents which, shall not exceed three (3) years from the time the
Framework Agreement was entered into and executed by the parties, and shall
not be extended beyond its lifetime.
8.7 To guarantee the faithful performance by the supplier or service provider of its
obligations under the Framework Agreement, it shall submit a performance
security in accordance with Section 39 of the revised IRR of RA No. 9184 or a
Performance Securing Declaration as defined under this Guidelines prior to the
signing of the Framework Agreement.
8.8 The basis for the computation of the performance security shall be the total
contract price whether the procurement is for a single or multi-year framework
agreement.
8.9 Notwithstanding the eligibility of a bidder, the BAC reserves the right to review
the qualifications of the supplier or service provider. If there has been any
change in the capability of the supplier or service provider to undertake its
obligations under the framework agreement so that if it fails the eligibility
criteria set thereon, the procuring entity shall consider the said supplier or
service provider as ineligible and shall disqualify it from obtaining any award or
contract.
8.10 Bidders executing the Framework Agreement either for single or multi-year
shall ensure the continuing validity of their eligibility documents during the
implementation of the contract.
9. CALL OFF
9.1. When the procuring entity has determined that an item or service covered in
the Framework Agreement is needed, it shall require the delivery of the
item or rendition of the service identified in the Framework Agreement List in
such quantity or scope and at the price for which it was awarded by
executing a Call-Off.
9.2. For a single-year Framework Agreement, Call-off may be executed and issued
to the winning supplier or service provider immediately upon determination
that an item or service is needed.
9.3. For a multi-year Framework Agreement, Call-off shall be issued after conduct
of mini competition in favor of the supplier or service provider that provided
the lowest calculated and responsive bid.
9.4. The BAC may execute as many Call-Offs for the same item as may be needed
within the period of the Framework Agreement as long as the total quantity for
all Call-Offs do not exceed the maximum quantity in the Framework Agreement
List and the aggregate amount of all executed Call-Offs do not exceed the total
contract price specified in the Framework Agreement.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
369
9.5. The succeeding Call-Offs shall have the same unit price based on the financial
bid offer in case of single-year Framework Agreement. For multi-year
Framework Agreement with multiple qualified bidders, the price depends on
the result of each Mini-Competition but not to exceed the price submitted
during the initial submission of the bidders’ financial bid as provided in Section
7.4.2 of this Guidelines.
9.6. The BAC may execute Call-Offs requiring delivery to multiple destinations or
performance at multiple locations.
9.7. For purposes of participation in other public bidding activities, the aggregate of
the Call-Offs for a particular item or similar items satisfactorily completed by
the supplier or service provider shall be considered as one (1) completed
contract with the cumulative amount thereof as the total contract amount. In
such case, the date appearing in the Certificate of Acceptance issued by the
procuring entity for the last delivery will be considered as the date of
completion of the contract. On the other hand, only those undelivered items in
the Call-Offs executed by the procuring entity shall be included in the
Statement of All Ongoing Government and Private Contracts for purposes of
participating in other bidding activities.
9.8. For purposes of the Certificate of Availability of Funds requirement, it shall be
issued only every Call-Off subject to existing auditing and budgeting rules and
regulations.
10. IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION OF FRAMEWORK AGREEMENTS
10.1 After receipt by the supplier or service provider of the Call-Off from the
procuring entity, it shall deliver or perform the items within the period specified
in the Framework Agreement, unless a different time is provided in the Call-Off.
10.2 Any extension of time for the delivery or performance shall be made in writing
and prior to the date of deliver or performance indicated in the Framework
Agreement or Call-Off and subject to prior approval by the procuring entity
after consideration of reasonable and justifiable causes.
10.3 If the supplier or service provider fails to deliver or perform within the agreed
period, including any time extension, it shall be liable to the procuring entity for
liquidated damages of at least equal to one-tenth of one percent (.001) of the
cost of the unperformed portion of the total amount of the items ordered per
Call-Off for every day of delay.
10.4 Once the cumulative amount of liquidated damages reaches ten percent (10%)
of the total amount of the items ordered per Call-Off, the procuring entity may
rescind the same, without prejudice to other courses of action and remedies
open to it.
10.5 The Warranty provision for goods under Section 62 of RA No. 9184 and its
revised IRR shall be observed under the Framework Agreement, and shall be
required for each Call-Off.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
370
10.6 Without prejudice to the provisions of applicable laws, rules, and guidelines,
the Framework Agreement shall automatically terminate under any of the
following conditions:
10.6.1 When the total maximum quantity specified in the Framework
Agreement has been exhausted; or
10.6.2 When the specified duration of the Framework Agreement has
expired.
10.7 All other rules governing contract implementation and termination under RA
No. 9184, its revised IRR, and relevant procurement policies shall be
applicable.
11. REPEAT ORDER
11.1 No Repeat Order for an item in the Framework Agreement List shall be allowed
until after the procuring entity has exhausted the maximum quantity for the
same item specified therein or after the Framework Agreement has expired,
whichever comes first and subject to the conditions provided in Section 51 of
RA No. 9184 and its revised IRR. For this purpose, the Repeat Order may only
be availed of within six (6) months from the date of the last or final Call-Off for
a specific item where the maximum quantity has been exhausted or from the
expiration of the Framework Agreement.
11.2 In case Repeat Order is allowed and resorted to, the twenty five percent (25%)
maximum allowable quantity shall be based on the aggregate quantity of actual
items ordered and delivered.
12. REPEALING CLAUSE
This Guidelines repeal GPPB Resolution Nos. 06-2005 and 01-2012, dated 01 April
2005 and 27 January 2012, respectively.
13. EFFECTIVITY
This Guidelines shall take effect immediately.
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
371
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
372
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
373
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
374
Guidelines on the Use of Framework Agreement by All
Procuring Entities
Appendix 32
375
Transparency, Accountability, and Good Governance in the
Procurement Process
Appendix 33
376
APPENDIX 33
TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND GOOD GOVERNANCE IN THE
PROCUREMENT PROCESS
410
1.0 OBJECTIVE
This Circular is being issued to remind all Procuring Entities (PEs) to strictly
comply with the existing rules on transparency, accountability, and good
governance policies and measures in the procurement process.
2.0 SCOPE AND APPLICATION
This Circular shall apply to all PEs or any branch, agency, department, bureau,
office, or instrumentality of the Government of the Philippines, National
Government Agencies, including Government-Owned and/or Controlled
Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, State Universities and Colleges,
and Local Government Units.
3.0 TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL PROCURING ENTITIES
All PEs are reminded of the following transparency and accountability
requirements under the Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 and its 2016 revised
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), the General Appropriations Act
(GAA), Resolutions issued by the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB)
and other relevant laws, rules and regulations.
TABLE 1
Legal
Basis
Document or
Information
Philippine
Government
Electronic
Procurement
System
(PhilGEPS)
Website
Conspicuous
place reservedfor
this purpose in
thepremises of
the PE
PE’s
website,if
any
Others
Competitive Bidding:
Sec. 8.4.2,
IRR of RA
No. 9184
Invitation to Bid (Goods
and Infrastructure Projects) ✓ ✓
✓
Sec. 8.4.2,
IRR of RA
No. 9184
Request for Expressionof
Interest (ConsultingServices) ✓ ✓
✓
Secs. 8.4.2
and 17.4,IRR
of RANo.
9184
Downloadable complete
BiddingDocuments ✓ ✓
✓
Sec. 8.4.3,
IRR of RA
No. 9184
Supplemental BidBulletin, if
applicable ✓ ✓ ✓
Send to all those
who have properly
secured the Bidding
Documents
410 GPPB Circular No. 01-2021 issued through GPPB Resolution No. 04-2021 dated 4 March 2021, published in The Philippine
Star on 15 March 2021.
Transparency, Accountability, and Good Governance in the
Procurement Process
Appendix 33
377
Sec. 29, IRR
of RANo.
9184
Notice of Postponement ✓ ✓ ✓
Sec. 33.2.4,
IRR of RANo.
9184
Results of the evaluation, as
approvedby the Head of the
Procuring Entity(Consulting
Services)
✓ ✓
Furnish all
participating
shortlisted
consultants
Sec. 37.1.6,
IRR of RANo.
9184
Notice of Award (NOA) ✓ ✓ ✓
Sec. 37.4.2,
IRR of RANo.
9184
Notice to Proceed(NTP) ✓
✓
Sec. 37.4.2,
IRR of RANo.
9184
Approved Contract ✓ ✓
Alternative Methods of Procurement
Sec. 54.2,
IRR of RA
No. 9184
Invitation or Request for
Submission of Price
Quotations orProposals
✓ ✓ ✓
Item
V(C)(2)((b)
(v), Annex
“H”, IRR of
RA No. 9184
Extension of the deadline in
Shopping ✓ ✓ ✓
Item
IV(L)(2)
Annex “H”,
IRR of RA
No. 9184
NOA, Contract or Purchase
Order (PO), including NTP if
necessary, except for
contracts with Approved
Budget for the Contract
(ABC) of PhP50,000
and below
✓ ✓ ✓
GPPB
Reso. No.09-
2020
Notice of suspension of the
conduct of procurement
activities
✓
GPPB
Reso. No.09-
2020
Notice of the lifting of the
suspension ✓
4.0 ADDITIONAL TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT UNDER
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER 34, SERIES OF 2020
4.1. The PhilGEPS, as the primary source and repository of information on
government procurement shall be user- and mobile-friendly, up-to-date,
and compliant with relevant policies on website content and web
accessibility prescribed by the Department of Information and
Communications Technology.
4.2. Official websites and social media platforms maintained and used by the
PEs shall serve as the secondary source of critical procurement
Transparency, Accountability, and Good Governance in the
Procurement Process
Appendix 33
378
information. For this purpose, agencies under the Executive Department
that do not have existing social media platforms are directed by the
President under Section 2 of Administrative Order (AO) No. 34 to establish
the same.
4.3 All agencies and instrumentalities under the Executive Department shall
post the following information on their official websites and social media
platforms in an organized manner and shall ensure its security and
integrity:
a. All the advertising411 and post-award information412 of Procurement
Projects under Table 1, as well as the transparency requirements
under Section 94 of RA No. 11465 (Transparency Seal).
b. For infrastructure projects, the following information pursuant to
Section 93 of RA No. 11465:
i. Project title, location and detailed description; ABC; and winning
contractor and the detailed estimates of the bid as awarded,
within thirty (30) calendar days from entering into the contract;
ii. Start of construction, target date of completion, completion
rate, project status and the reason/s in case of delay;
iii. Source of fund, implementing office, responsible official, contact
number and electronic mail address; and
iv. Detailed actual cost of the project, variations issued, if any,
within thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance of a
certificate of completion.
4.4 In procurements involving and affecting national security, the disclosure
of the specific components of the procurement documents may be
dispensed with, asmay be determined by the Head of the Procuring Entity,
on the basis of its nature, classification, sensitivity and confidentiality in
accordance with Section 19 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184 and
Item IV(D) of its Annex “H."
4.5 For PEs under the Executive Department whose projects have an ABC of
Fifty Million Pesos (PhP50,000,000.00) and above, the post-award
information under Item 4.3(a) shall also be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Section 4 of AO No. 34.
5.0 ONLINE ACCESS TO OBSERVERS
5.1 The PhilGEPS shall provide a facility for observers, duly authorized by the
Bids and Awards Committee, to monitor the procurement proceedings
online, pursuant to Section 8.7 and Section 13 of the 2016 revised IRR of
411 Shall refer to the Invitation to Bid or Request for Expression of Interest pursuant to Section 8.4.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of
RA No. 9184, in relation to Section 21, and to Invitation or Request for submission of price quotations or proposals pursuant to
Section 54.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
412 Shall refer to the Notice of Award pursuant to Section 37.1.6 and Section 37.4.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184,
and to the Notice of Award, Contract or Purchase Order, including the Notice to Proceed, if necessary under Item IV(L)(2), Annex
“H,” of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
Transparency, Accountability, and Good Governance in the
Procurement Process
Appendix 33
379
RA No. 9184.
5.2 PEs shall provide their duly-authorized observers online access to monitor
all stages of the procurement process through the modernized PhilGEPS.
Until such time that the modernized PhilGEPS becomes operational and is
able to provide said facility, PEs shall provide said observers online access
to monitor the conduct of procurement proceedings through their own
facilities.
5.3 PEs that are unable to provide the said online access shall inform the
GPPB- TSO in writing by emailing observers@gppb.gov.ph, together with
the reasons therefor, and shall be considered in the performance
evaluation of the PE through the Agency Procurement Compliance and
Performance Indicator System and the Procurement Monitoring Report.
6.0 ONLINE BLACKLISTING PORTAL
6.1. All PEs must observe the rules and procedures provided under the
Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of Manufacturers, Suppliers,
Distributors, Contractors and Consultants as provided under GPPB
Resolution No. 40-2017 and GPPB Resolution No. 14-2020 on the
Prescribed Form of Blacklisting Order, Implementation of the Online
Blacklisting Portal (OBP) for Posting and Updating of Status of Blacklisted
Entities.
6.2 With the creation and mandatory use of the OBP which can be
accessed through
https://www.gppb.gov.ph/OnlineBlacklistingPortal/pages/1111d0b57dxx4f
dsd e96812839a349e18, the Consolidated Blacklisting Report (CBR) can
now be generated and updated real time, providing up-to-date
information that is readily accessible to all interested parties, including
the Commission on Audit. Likewise, the OBP provides automatic
notification to the PE, through its BAC Chairperson, and the PhilGEPS of
every posting and updating of the status ofblacklisted entities made in the
OBP.
6.3 Pursuant to Section 5 of AO No. 34, the PhilGEPS shall post the CBR found
in this link [https://www.gppb.gov.ph/ConsolidatedBlacklistingReport.php]
on its website and all PEs under the Executive Department are directed to
post the said CBR on their official website and social media platforms.
7.0 This Circular shall take effect immediately.
8.0 For guidance and compliance.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
380
APPENDIX 34
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019 Vaccinesand its
Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other Goods and Services
Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525 or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program
Act of 2021413
1. OBJECTIVE
This Circular is formulated to expedite the procurement of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines, and ancillary supplies and services or
other goods and services necessary for the storage, transport, deployment,
and administration of COVID-19 vaccines under the Republic Act (RA) No.
11525 or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021.
2. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
This Circular shall apply:
2.1 to all Procuring Entities (PEs) or any branch, constitutional commission
or office, agency, department, bureau, office, or instrumentality of the
Government of the Philippines, National Government Agencies,
including Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations,
Government Financing Institutions, State Universities and Colleges, and
Local Government Units (LGUs) procuring Goods and Services;414 and
2.2 for the procurement of the following:
a. COVID-19 vaccines, through the Department of Health (DOH) and
the NationalTask Force Against COVID-19 (NTF); and
b. ancillary supplies and services or other goods and services
necessary for the storage, transport, deployment, and
administration of COVID-19 vaccines, as defined by the DOH.
3. GENERAL GUIDELINES
3.1 The procurement modality to be reflected in the Annual Procurement
Plan (APP) shall be Negotiated Procurement (Emergency Cases)
pursuant to Section 53(b) of RA No. 9184 and Section 53.2 of its
2016 revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) for all
413 GPPB Circular No. 02-2021 issued through GPPB Resolution No. 06-2021 dated 25 March 2021, published in the Philippine
Star on 9 April 2021.
414 Refer to all items, supplies, materials and general support services, except consulting services and infrastructure projects,
which may be needed in the transaction of public businesses or in the pursuit of any government undertaking, project or
activity, whether in the nature of equipment, furniture, stationery, materials for construction, or personal property of any kind,
including non-personal or contractual services such as the repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, as well as
trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous services, as well as procurement of materials and supplies
provided by the procuring entity for such services as defined in Section 5(h) of RA No. 9184.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
381
Procurement Projects415 under Item 2.2, subject to the conditions or
requirements provided hereunder.
3.2 The DOH, NTF, and PEs shall ensure that in the negotiation for the
procurement of Item 2.2, the price, provision on advance payment
and other terms and conditions shall not be disadvantageous to the
government.416
3.3 Procuring from several sources, if no one supplier is able to provide
the required quantity, shall not be considered as splitting of contracts.
3.4 Pursuant to Section 11 of RA No. 11525, Procurement Projects under
this Circular are exempt from customs duties, value-added tax, excise
tax, donor’s tax, and other fees, subject to the rules and regulations
that may be issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.
3.5 As provided under Section 4 of RA No. 11525, LGUs that will be
procuring COVID-19 vaccines shall ensure that the quantity to be
procured shall be limited to seventy-five percent (75%) of the target
population for vaccination. The quantity of vaccines to be procured
may only be increased or adjusted by the Inter-Agency Task Force for
the Management of Emerging Infectious Disease when there is a
determination by the DOH and the NTF that there is sufficient supply
of vaccines.
3.6 For record and monitoring purposes, all documents relating to the award
of contract for the procurements covered by this Circular shall be
immediately submitted to the Head of the Procuring Entity (HoPE),
through the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC), to ensure compliance
with all the conditions and requirements under RA No. 11525 and this
Circular.
4. PROCEDURE FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF COVID-19 VACCINES
PEs are guided by the following in the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines:
4.1 Prior to the conduct of negotiations, the DOH and the NTF shall
coordinate with the PE that will be funding the procurement to
determine the budget for the purpose. The funds for the procurement
of COVID-19 vaccines shall be validated by the appropriate office in
the PE to ensure that there are funds in its budget to cover for the
same.
415 Definition covered by this Circular shall be Negotiated Procurement (Emergency Cases) under Section 53(b) of RA No. 9184
and Section 53.2 of its 2016 revised IRR.
416 The parties should exercise prudence and caution in making the advance payment seeing to it that the same will not
constitute as irregular, unnecessary, extravagant, excessive or unconscionable use of funds, as defined under existing
accounting and auditing rules.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
382
Once validated, the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines shall be
included by the PE in its APP approved by the HoPE or its duly
authorized official.
4.2 In view of the urgent necessity of this procurement, the DOH and the
NTF may commence with the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines even
without an approved APP subject to the validation by the appropriate
office in the PE that there are fundsin its budget to cover the same.
The APP shall be approved before the processing of payment and the
approved APP shall be posted on the PE’s website within thirty days
(30) from its approval. In case a PE does not have an agency website,
the approved APP shall be postedat any conspicuous place reserved for
this purpose in the premises of the PE.
4.3 The DOH and NTF shall determine the preparatory documents and
requirements for the negotiations in the procurement of COVID-19
vaccines based upon the market research of available suppliers,
manufacturers or distributors. The DOH and NTF shall likewise identify
any eligibility documents as well as the form and content of the formal
offer or bid submission or any other negotiation documents they deem
necessary based upon their negotiations.
In determining the foregoing documents and requirements, the DOH
and the NTF shall ensure that the COVID-19 vaccines to be procured
are compliant with the rules of the Food and Drugs Administration
pursuant to Section 621 of RA No. 11525.
4.4 After negotiations, the DOH and/or the NTF shall inform the PE of the
results thereof, including any additional documents required to be
submitted prior to the execution of contract or any similar agreements,
to ensure the timely, effective and efficient execution of the contract,
either in the form of a tripartite agreement, supply agreement,
advance market commitment, purchase order or any similar
arrangements as may be prescribed by the DOH and the NTF.
The HoPE may also delegate the signing of the said contract or any
similar agreements to any official of the PE, except to an official where
there exists a conflict of interest, such as the person who was
authorized to directly participate in the negotiations.
4.5 The issuance of the Notice of Award (NOA) and Notice to Proceed
(NTP) after the award and/or the signing of contract or any similar
agreements shall not be required for this procurement.
5. PROCUREMENT OF ANCILLARY SUPPLIES AND SERVICES OR OTHER
GOODS AND SERVICES NECESSARY FOR THE STORAGE,
TRANSPORT, DEPLOYMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF COVID-19
VACCINES
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
383
5.1 PEs shall negotiate for the procurement of ancillary supplies and
services or other goods and services necessary for the storage,
transport, deployment, and administration of COVID-19 vaccines in
accordance with the procedure provided herein.
The determination of what constitutes ancillary supplies and services
or other goods and services necessary for the storage, transport,
deployment, and administration of COVID-19 vaccines shall be made
by the PE in accordance with the definition provided by the DOH, as
the agency mandated to develop national plans, technical standards,
and guidelines on health pursuant to Executive Order No. 102, series
of 1999.22
For the purpose of this Circular, ancillary supplies and services or other
goods and services necessary for the storage, transport, deployment,
and administration of COVID-19 vaccines shall be collectively referred
to herein as “Ancillary Supplies and Services.”
5.2 To ensure the efficient and timely procurement of Ancillary Supplies
and Services under RA No. 11525, PEs are encouraged to delegate the
following authorities in this wise:
a. the HoPE, with respect to the awarding and/or signing of contract
or any similaragreements for the procurement of Ancillary Supplies
and Services, may delegate to any official of the PE, except to
those where there exists conflict of interest such as the BAC
Chairperson, members or person authorized to negotiate the
bidding; and
b. the BAC in the direct negotiation with a legally, technically and
financially capable supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service
provider for the procurement of Ancillary Supplies and Services.
The HoPE may delegate the said authority to the end-user unit or
any appropriate bureau, committee, support or procuring unit.
If no such delegation is made, the BAC shall be the one to directly
negotiate with a legally, technically and financially capable
supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service provider.
5.3 Preparation of Project Requirements:
5.3.1. The end-user or implementing unit of the PE shall prepare
the projectrequirements, with the following details:
a. Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC);
b. Name and Details of the Ancillary Supplies and Services;
c. Name of the supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service provider;
and
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
384
d. Other relevant information that may be required by the
National Vaccination Program and other related issuances
issued by the DOH and the NTF.
5.3.2. The project requirements and contract packaging shall be
based on the PE’s needs and the capability of supplier,
manufacturer, distributor or service provider as determined
through initial market scanning or scoping accompanied by
appropriate supporting documents identifying the Ancillary
Supplies and Services (e.g., Technical Specifications) to be
procured. Specifications for the procurement of Ancillary
Supplies and Services shall be based on relevant
characteristics, functionality, and/or performance
requirements.
5.3.3. There is no required form to be used in the preparation of the
project requirements.
5.3.4. The project requirements shall then be submitted to the BAC
or duly authorized bureau, committee, support or procuring
unit for the conduct ofprocurement.
5.4 Updating of the APP:
5.4.1. The BAC or end-user unit or any other appropriate bureau,
committee, support or procuring unit shall recommend for
approval of the HoPE or hisor her duly authorized official any
updating of the APP to cover the procurement of Ancillary
Supplies and Services, subject to the validation by the
appropriate office in the PE that there are funds in its budget
to cover for the same.
5.4.2 In view of the urgent necessity to procure Ancillary Supplies
and Services, the PE may commence with the procurement
even without an approved APP subject to the validation by the
appropriate office in the PE that there are funds in its budget to
cover for the same.
5.4.3 The APP shall be approved before the processing of payment
and the approved APP shall be posted on the PE’s website
within thirty days (30) from its approval. In case a PE does not
have an agency website, the approved APP shall be posted at
any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the
premises of the PE.
The approval of the APP by the HoPE or his or her duly
authorized official covering the procurement using Negotiated
Procurement (Emergency Cases) pursuant to Section 53(b) of
RA No. 9184 and Section 53.2 of its 2016 revised IRR
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
385
effectively confirms the existence and veracity of the ground(s)
relied upon in resorting thereto.
5.5 Documentary Requirements:
5.5.1. PEs already maintaining a bidder’s updated file of any of the
following requirements, whether through the PhilGEPS
Certificate of Registration and Membership or its own records,
shall not require its resubmission.
5.5.2. Otherwise, PEs shall require one copy of the following
documentary requirements:
a. Mayor’s or Business Permit;
b. Omnibus Sworn Statement (OSS), which shall be an original
copy, a template of which is attached herewith as “Appendix 1”
for reference;
For projects with an ABC above PhP 500,000.00:
c. Income Tax Returns (Annual Income Tax Return of the
preceding tax year) OR Business Tax Returns (Value Added Tax
or Percentage Tax Return covering the previous six months).
5.5.3 Bid security is not required for this procurement. On the other
hand, PEs have the option to require or dispense with the
submission of performance and/or warranty securities
depending on the nature of the Procurement Project.417
5.6 Rules in the submission of documentary requirements:
5.6.1. Suppliers, manufacturers, distributors or service providers may
submit their documentary requirements in printed copies or by
electronic mail or facsimile.418
5.6.2. The use of digital signature or similar means may be used in all
procurement-related documents.419
5.6.3. PEs are allowed to accept a copy of the recently expired
Mayor’s or Business Permit and other documents showing proof
of application for renewal such as the Official Receipt and
payment for the renewal of the permit will suffice, subject to
submission of the Mayor’s Permit after award of contract but
before payment.420
5.6.4. As a general rule, the OSS shall be submitted at any time
before award ofcontract. However, an unnotarized OSS may be
417 Section 54.5 and Item IV (M) of Annex H of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
418 GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, dated 07 May 2020.
419 Ibid.
420 Ibid.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
386
accepted subject to compliance therewith after award but
before payment.421
5.6.5. For foreign suppliers, manufacturers, distributors or service
providers, the equivalent document in their jurisdiction, for the
documents required herein, would suffice consistent with
Section 23.2 of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
5.7 Once the project requirements are completed and the APP has been
updated or budget has been confirmed, as the case may be, the BAC
or duly authorized end- user unit or any other appropriate bureau,
committee, support or procuring unit shall then directly negotiate or
procure from a legally, technically and financially capable supplier,
manufacturer, distributor or service provider.
5.8 The BAC, or duly authorized end-user unit or any other appropriate
bureau, committee, support or procuring unit, shall recommend to the
HoPE or his or her duly authorized official the award of the contract to
the supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service provider after
validation of the required documents under Item5.5.
5.9 The HoPE or his or her duly authorized official shall immediately enter
into contract with the supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service
provider, subject to Section 41 of RA No. 9184 or the Reservation
Clause.
5.10 The issuance of the NOA and NTP after the award and/or the signing
of contract or any similar agreements shall not be required for this
procurement.
6. ADVANCE PAYMENT
6.1 Pursuant to Sections 3 and 4 of RA No. 11525, all PEs are authorized
to make an advance payment up to the full cost of the contract price
under the following conditions:
6.1.1. to cover the procurement of vaccines, and ancillary supplies
and services or other goods and services necessary for the
storage, transport, deployment, and administration of COVID19 vaccines as defined by the DOH; and
6.1.2. when advance payment is required by the supplier,
manufacturer, distributor or service provider.
6.2 Consistent with Item 3.2 above, the DOH and the NTF, as well as all
PEs shall ensure that in agreeing to provide an advance payment, the
same will not constitute as an irregular, unnecessary, extravagant,
excessive or unconscionable use of funds, as defined under existing
421 Ibid.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
387
accounting and auditing rules.
6.3 The amount of advance payment agreed upon and the reasons
therefor shall be posted in accordance with Item 7 of this Circular.
7. POSTING REQUIREMENTS
7.1 For purposes of transparency and accountability, the following
information shall be posted:
a. ABC or company budget;
b. Name and details of the ordered or procured COVID-19
vaccines or Ancillary Supplies or Services;
c. Name of the supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service provider;
d. Amount of advance payment made and the reasons given by
the supplier, manufacturer, distributor or service provider;
and
e. Amount of contract as awarded or agreed upon.
7.2 For the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines, posting shall be made as follows:
a. PEs shall post the information in Item 7.1 at any conspicuous
place in their premises and on the GPPB Online Portal,422
within thirty (30) days after award or execution of a contract
or any similar agreements.
b. In the case of the Philippine Red Cross (PRC) and private
entities, the posting shall be made on the GPPB Online Portal
within thirty (30) days after execution of a contract or any
similar agreements in accordance with Section 6 of RA No.
11525.
c. For those covered by the retroactive provision under
Sections 3 and 4 of RA No. 11525,423 the posting shall be
made within thirty (30) days after the effectivity of this
Circular.
7.3 For the procurement of Ancillary Supplies and Services, PEs shall post the
information in Item 7.1 at any conspicuous place in their premises and on
the GPPB Online Portal,424 within thirty (30) days after award or execution
of a contractor similar agreement.
7.4 PEs procuring COVID-19 vaccines and Ancillary Supplies and Services, and
the PRC, and private entities procuring COVID-19 vaccines shall nominate
their principal and alternative authorized representatives who shall be
provided access for posting the required procurement information on the
422 Section 6 of RA No. 11525.
423 Sections 3 and 4 of RA No. 11525 indicate that these Sections have retroactive application from 01 January 2021.
424 Section 6 of RA No. 11525.
Guidelines for the Procurement of Coronavirus Disease 2019
Vaccines and its Ancillary Supplies and Services or Other
Goods and Services Authorized under Republic Act No. 11525
or the COVID-19 Vaccination Program Act of 2021
Appendix 34
388
GPPB Online Portal. A copy of the agency or company ID showing the
name and position, as well as the email address of the said authorized
representatives shall be endorsed by the BAC Chairperson for PEs or
appropriate officer for the PRC and private entities to the GPPB through
GPPBonlineregistration@gppb.gov.ph.
8. EFFECTIVITY
This Circular shall take effect immediately upon publication and shall
remain in full forceand effect during the period of the State of Calamity.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
389
APPENDIX 35
GUIDELINES FOR THE CONDUCT OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN
PROCUREMENT
425
1. PURPOSE
The Guidelines is formulated to:
1.1. Provide the rules and procedures on Negotiated Procurement - Community
Participation (NP-CP) under Section 53.12 of the 2016 revised Implementing
Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184, as revised under
Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) Resolution No. 18-2021,
which states that:
Community Participation. Where, in the interest of project
sustainability or to achieve certain specific social objectives, it is
desirable in selected projects, or its components, to call for
participation of local communities through Community or Social
Groups, or members thereof in the delivery of Goods and Simple
Infrastructure Projects, subject to the guidelines issued by the
GPPB.
1.2. Streamline the rules on NP-CP as provided under GPPB Resolution Nos. 09-
2014,426 15-2015,427 17-2016428 and 28-2016.429
1.3. Establish a standard procedure for the conduct of NP-CP in the procurement
of Goods and Simple Infrastructure Projects from Community or Social
Groups or members thereof; this, notwithstanding, other procurement
modalities may still be prescribed in provisions430 of these following laws:
1.3.1. RA No. 11037 or the “Masustansyang Pagkain para sa Batang
Pilipino Act;”
1.3.2. RA No. 11148 or the “Kalusugan at Nutrisyon ng Mag-Nanay Act;”
1.3.3 RA No. 11321 or the “Sagip Saka Act;” and
1.3.4 Any other law or government program which may thereafter
require the participation of community groups.
1.4. Institutionalize the procedure for direct purchase of Agricultural and
Fishery Products from Local Farmers and Fisherfolks.
425 GPPB Circular No. 02-2021 issued through GPPB Resolution No. 06-2021 dated 25 March 2021, published in the Philippine
Star on 9 April 2021.
426 Approving and Adopting the Community Participation Procurement Manual (CPPM) and the Implementing Guidelines for
Negotiated Procurement under Section 53.12 (Community Participation) of the Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations of
Republic Act (RA) No. 9184.
427 Approving the Supplemental Guidelines for Community Participation in procurement method for Foreign Assisted Projects
and adopting the Community-Managed Procurement approach in the CPPM.
428 Approving the CPPM for the Partnership against Hunger and Poverty Program of the Department of Social Welfare and
Development, Department of Agrarian Reform, and the Department of Agriculture.
429 Approving the Guidelines on Community-Managed Procurement as a Supplement to the CPPM.
430 E.g. Section 2(k), IRR of RA No. 11321 defining Negotiated Procurement in relation to Section 11 of the same IRR on the
Direct Purchase by National and Local Agencies.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
390
1.5. Integrate inclusiveness in the procurement process by encouraging the
participation of local expertise, generating local employment, enhancing
community capacity, promoting the use of local materials and indigenous
technology, offering the community members with basic financial services,
including cashless digital transactions, regardless of their income or
savings, among others.
2. SCOPE AND APPLICATION
These Guidelines shall apply to:
2.1. All Procuring Entities (PEs) or any branch, Constitutional Commission,
agency, department, bureau, office, or instrumentality of the Government
of the Philippines, National Government Agencies (NGAs), including
Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), Government
Financial Institutions (GFI), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), and
Local Government Units (LGUs);
2.2. Procurement of:
2.2.1. Goods,431 including direct purchase of Agricultural and Fishery
Products from Local Farmers and Local Fisherfolks; and
2.2.2. Simple Infrastructure Projects from local communities through
Community or Social Group or members thereof, to meet the
specific social objectives or for project sustainability.
3. DEFINITION OF TERMS
3.1. Accredited Farmers and Fisherfolk Cooperatives and Enterprises –
refer to the farmers and fisherfolk cooperatives and enterprises, as defined
under Section 2(g) of Administrative Circular No. 08, series of 2019,432
accredited by the Department of Agriculture pursuant to Section 11.5
thereof and registered in the Farmers and Fisherfolk Enterprise
Development Information System (FFEDIS).433
3.2. Agricultural and Fishery Products - pertain to locally produced live,
fresh, chilled, frozen, and unprocessed agriculture and fishery-based
products including agricultural and fishery inputs, such as food crops, fish
produce, livestock, etc.
3.3. Community or Social Groups (CSGs) - refer to groups of individuals
living in close proximity to each other or social groups or sectors which
share a common agenda, cause, or interest for the community. They may
include associations of barangay health workers, farmers, fisherfolk,
431 Section 5 of RA No. 9184 and its 2016 revised IRR, which defines Goods as all items, supplies, materials and general
support services, except consulting services and infrastructure projects, which may be needed in the transaction of public
businesses or in the pursuit of any government undertaking, project or activity, whether in the nature of equipment, furniture,
stationery, materials for construction, or personal property of any kind, including non-personal or contractual services such as
the repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or
analogous services, as well as procurement of materials and supplies provided by the procuring entity for such services.
432 IRR of RA No. 11321.
433 Section 2(a), IRR of RA No. 11321.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
391
women, elderly, indigenous peoples, parent-teacher associations, among
others.
3.4. Community-based Project – refers to a project that is to be
implemented at the community level where the participation of local
communities through CSGs or members thereof is desirable for project
sustainability or to achieve certain specific social objectives.
3.5. Local Fisherfolk – refers to a Filipino individual who is directly or
personally and physically engaged in taking and/or culturing and
processing fishery and/or aquatic resources.
3.6. Local Farmer – refers to a Filipino individual who is engaged in the
planting, cultivating, and/or performing post-harvest duties involving rice,
corn, and other crops.
3.7. Simple Infrastructure Project – refers to construction, improvement,
rehabilitation, demolition, repair, restoration, or maintenance of structures,
technical facilities and systems with an Approved Budget for the Contract
(ABC) not exceeding Five Million Pesos (PhP 5,000,000.00) built at the
community level for the sustenance of lives and livelihoods of the
population living in a community and built according to the needs and
aspirations of the community population.
4. GENERAL GUIDELINES
4.1. PEs, through its Bids and Awards Committee (BAC), undertaking
Community-based Projects may resort to the NP-CP under Section 53.12 of
the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184 in any of the instances found in Item
4.2 of this Guidelines. The PE shall determine what Procurement Projects
shall be procured using this modality.
4.2. Community Participation is most appropriate when the:
4.2.1. involvement of people in the community, in part or whole, is
necessary to sustain the project outputs and achieve its intended
outcomes;
4.2.2. empowerment of local communities through CSGs and members
thereof is promoted by enhancing their knowledge and skills,
and creating an environment for development; or
4.2.3. participation of Local Farmer and Local Fisherfolk is necessary to
ensure the availability of food for the target community or to
improve their economic, environmental, and social well-being;
4.3. CSGs may be classified into two (2) types:
4.3.1 Organized Community or Social Group – shall refer to a
CSG that has a defined organizational structure, identified
membership and leadership, and adopts a principle of shared
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
392
responsibility for their actions. It shall likewise be registered with
the appropriate regulatory body such as but not limited to
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI), Cooperative Development Authority
(CDA), Department of Agriculture (DA), and National
Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP). It may include
Accredited Farmers and Fisherfolk Cooperative and Enterprise,
Civil Society Organizations (CSO), and Community-based
Organizations, such as Department of Agrarian Reform’s
Beneficiaries Organizations, Department of Social Welfare and
Development’s Sustainable Livelihood Associations.
4.3.2 Unorganized Community or Social Group – shall refer to a
CSG that is not registered in any government regulatory body or
a member of a duly recognized private organization.
Unorganized Community Groups may include community labor
groups or pakyaw groups, associations of barangay health
workers, farmers, fisherfolk, women, elderly, indigenous
peoples, parent-teacher associations, among others.
4.4. Organized CSGs shall be engaged in NP-CP to supply Goods or implement
Simple Infrastructure Projects or to perform the labor-only component of
Procurement Projects.
On the other hand, Unorganized CSGs are limited to performing the
labor-only component of procurement projects.
4.5. The ABC for the procurement of Goods, Simple Infrastructure Projects,
and labor-only contracts shall be determined by the PE in accordance
with Item 5.6 of this Guidelines.
5. PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES
5.1 In case the PE plans to implement a multi-year Community-based Project, the
same shall be subject to the issuance of Multi-Year Contractual Authority
(MYCA) for NGAs or an equivalent document for GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and
LGUs, pursuant to the guidelines issued by the Department of Budget and
Management. The ABC for multi-year projects shall be reflected in the MYCA
or the equivalent document.
5.2. The End-user unit shall identify project proposals in line with the PE’s
strategic plan, key results areas, and major final outputs that will be
sustainable if implemented with the participation of the CSGs or members
thereof, or where their engagement will lead to the achievement of specific
social objectives. The procurement modality to be reflected in the Annual
Procurement Plan shall be NP-CP pursuant to Section 53.12 of the 2016
revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
5.3. The objectives, requirements, and target community for the Communitybased Project shall be identified by the End-user unit. The project
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
393
requirements shall include a brief description of the Goods or Simple
Infrastructure Projects to be procured, the technical specifications or scope of
work, the ABC, the manner and deadline for submission of quotations, the
terms and conditions of the project, and other necessary information.
5.3.1. In preparing the technical specifications of Goods, the End-user
shall identify clear standards of functionality and performance in
the technical specifications to be met.
5.3.2. For Simple Infrastructure Projects, the PE shall ensure the conduct
of detailed engineering activities in accordance with Section 17.6
and Annex “A” of the 2016 revised IRR of RA 9184. Further, the
PE shall provide a clear delineation in the scope of work for each
phase to ensure that the project would be usable and structurally
sound.
5.4. The End-user shall conduct a market study and scoping to determine the
availability of CSGs within the area where the target community is located. If
no such CSG is capable to supply the required Goods or implement Simple
Infrastructure Projects, the PE shall determine if CSGs in nearby or other
communities may be engaged based on the specific objectives and purpose
of the Community-based Projects, i.e., improving the well-being of the target
community or to achieve positive outcomes like poverty reduction, hunger
mitigation or elimination, climate change adaptation or mitigation, gender
inequality reduction, disease reduction, job generation, among others.
5.5. To ensure the readiness of the procurement, the End-user shall undertake
the following:
5.5.1 conduct prior consultation with the local communities through CSGs or
members thereof before implementation of any Community-based
Project;
5.5.2 secure any prior approval from the LGU as may be required under
Section 27 of RA No. 7160 or the Local Government Code and its IRR
or other laws and issuances;
5.5.3 consider the peculiar needs and situations of Indigenous Peoples and
those located in conflict-afflicted areas that are included in the target
community for the implementation of Community-based Project; and
5.5.4. determine the necessity of undertaking activities for social preparation
and capacity development of the target community prior to the
implementation of Community-based Projects.
5.6. The maximum amount of the ABC for the Community-based Project or any of
its component to be procured through NP-CP shall be as follows:
Community-based Projects Approved Budget for Contract
(in Philippine Pesos)
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
394
Goods 5,000,000.00
Simple Infrastructure Project 5,000,000.00
Labor-only contract 1,000,000.00
Provided, that if the effective implementation of the Community-based
Project would require an ABC beyond the above-stated amount, the PE may
increase the ABC subject to the prior approval of the Head of the Procuring
Entity (HoPE). The HoPE shall submit to the GPPB a report on the amount of
the ABC approved and the reason therefore for proper monitoring.
5.7. The GPPB shall consider the foregoing reports submitted by PEs in the review
of this Guidelines.
6. PROCUREMENT PROCEDURE
6.1. Eligibility Requirements
6.1.1. Organized Community or Social Groups
Legal Requirements
a. Certificate of registration from the DTI, SEC, CDA, DA, Department
of Labor and Employment, NCIP; or in the case of Civil Society
Organizations, Non-Government Organizations or Peoples’
Organizations that are compliant with the requirements of a CSG,
registration from NGAs434 or LGUs,435 and
b. A sworn affidavit (Appendix “1”) executed by the head or its
authorized representative that affirms that:
i. none of its incorporators, officers or members is an agent or
related by consanguinity or affinity up to the third (3rd) civil
degree to the HoPE, a member of the BAC, the Technical
Working Group (TWG) or the Secretariat, or other official
authorized to process and/or approve the proposal, contract,
and release of funds; and
ii. none of its incorporators, officers or members has a related
business to the Community-based Project being procured at
hand; or disclosure of the members if they have related
business, if any, to the Community-based Project being
procured at hand and the extent or percentage of ownership
or interest therein.
Technical Requirements
434 E.g. Accreditation under COA-DBM-DSWD Joint Resolution No. 2014-001- Guidelines for Accreditation of CSO as
Implementing Entities of Government or Public Funds or COA-DBM-DSWD Joint Resolution No. 2015-001-Supplementary
Guidelines on Accreditation of CSOs.
435 E.g. LGU Accreditation of Non-Government Organizations or Peoples’ Organization.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
395
c. Statement of all its completed contracts similar to the Communitybased Projects to be bid and/or list indicating the work experiences
of their members that reflect the capacity to deliver the Goods, or
implement the Simple Infrastructure Projects, at an equal or higher
established standards.
The End-user’s acceptance or official receipt(s) or sales invoice
issued for the completed contracts shall be attached to the
Statement as proof thereof.
Additional requirements for Simple Infrastructure Projects:
d. Statement of the CSG’s ongoing government and private contracts
indicating the outstanding and uncompleted portions thereof,
including contracts awarded but not yet started, if any, whether
similar or not similar in nature and complexity to the contract to be
bid.
e. Philippine Contractors Accreditation Board license pursuant to
Presidential Decree No. 4566, as amended.
Financial Requirements
f. Photocopy or scanned copy of the bank book with complete bank
account information; or a proof that it maintains books of accounts
such as cash receipts journal, cash disbursement journal, general
journal, and general ledger.
For Organized CSG that has participated in any government
Community-based Project for the past two (2) years:
g. Latest Income Tax Return (ITR) for the preceding Tax Year or for
new establishments, the most recent quarter’s ITR or Business Tax
Return; and
h. Updated Audited Financial Statement (AFS), which should not be
earlier than two (2) years from the date of bid submission. The AFS
shall be stamped received by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR)
or accredited and authorized institutions, or electronically received
via the AFS e-submission of the BIR with a filing reference number.
Additional requirements for Simple Infrastructure Projects:
i. The Organized CSG’s computation of Net Financial Contracting
Capacity (NFCC), where the values of the CSG's current assets and
current liabilities shall be based on the latest AFS submitted to the
BIR. The computation of a CSG’s NFCC must be at least equal to the
ABC of the Community-based Project, calculated as follows:
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
396
NFCC = [(Current assets minus current liabilities) (15)] minus the
value of all outstanding or uncompleted portions of the projects
under ongoing contracts, including awarded contracts yet to be
started, coinciding with the contract to be bid.
6.1.2. Unorganized Community or Social Groups
Legal Requirements
a. A photocopy of the government-issued ID of the officers or
members of the Unorganized CSG showing that they are
residents of the target community, or nearby and other
communities if allowed by the PE; and
b. A sworn affidavit (Appendix “1”) executed by the head or
authorized representative that:
i. none of its organizers, officers or members is an agent or
related by consanguinity or affinity up to the third (3rd)
civil degree to the HOPE, a member of the BAC, the TWG
or the Secretariat, or other official authorized to process
and/or approve the proposal, contract, and release of
funds; and
ii. commitment of the Unorganized CSG that it shall perform
and deliver all the obligations and undertakings under the
contract covering the procurement at hand if no
performance or warranty security is required by the PE.
Technical Requirements
c. List of completed work experiences of the members of the
Unorganized CSG that meet or satisfy the workmanship and
skill set requirements, which shows the capacity to perform
the required labor component for the delivery of Goods or
implementation of Simple Infrastructure Project.
Financial Requirements
d. Photocopy or scanned copy of the bank account under the
name of any of its officers or members with the complete
bank account information; or a proof that it maintains books
of accounts such as cash receipts journal, cash disbursement
journal, general journal, and general ledger.
6.2 Posting and Submission of Request for Quotation
6.2.1. The End-user unit of the PE shall prepare the Request for Quotation
(RFQ), which shall indicate the technical specification, scope of
work, ABC, date of delivery, the required quantity, and other terms
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
397
and conditions of the Goods or Simple Infrastructure Project to be
procured.
6.2.2 The BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post the RFQ for at least
three (3) calendar days: (i) on the website of the PE, if available;
(ii) in the premises of the PE; (iii) in at least three (3) conspicuous
places where the Community-based Project shall be implemented
(e.g., bulletin board, public transport terminals, public markets,
etc.); and (iv) in the Philippine Government Electronic Procurement
System (PhilGEPS) website.
6.2.3. The BAC shall also send the RFQs to CSGs of known qualifications
within the locality where the Community-based Project shall be
implemented.
For the procurement of Agricultural and Fishery Products from
Accredited Farmers and Fisherfolk Cooperative and Enterprise, the
BAC shall, in addition to the above, send the RFQ to the FFEDIS for
posting at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in their
premises and for dissemination to all farmers and fisherfolk
enterprises and cooperatives in its registry.
6.2.4. Participating CSGs shall submit their sealed quotation, if submitted
manually, or password-protected quotation, if submitted
electronically, on the date and time prescribed in the terms and
conditions of the RFQ, in accordance with Section 25.9 of the 2016
revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
6.2.5. The receipt of one (1) quotation is sufficient to proceed with the
evaluation of the quotation. In case there are no quotations
received hours before the prescribed deadline, the BAC may extend
the deadline for the submission of RFQs three (3) times.
Extensions of deadline shall likewise be posted for a period three
(3) calendar days (i) on the website of the PE, if available; (ii) in
the premises of the PE; (iii) in at least three (3) conspicuous places
where the Community- based Project shall be implemented (e.g.,
bulletin board, public transport terminals, public markets, etc.); and
(iv) in the PhilGEPS website.
6.3 Opening and Evaluation
6.3.1. On the prescribed deadline, the BAC shall open submitted
quotations and prepare an Abstract of Quotations setting forth the:
a. names of the CSGs that responded to the RFQ;
b. corresponding price quotations; and
c. Lowest Calculated Quotation (LCQ) or Single Calculated
Quotation (SCQ).
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
398
6.3.2. The evaluation of the submitted quotations shall be completed
within a maximum of seven (7) calendar days from the prescribed
deadline. After the evaluation of the RFQ, the BAC will determine
the CSGs with the LCQ or SCQ.
6.4 Post-Qualification
6.4.1 The BAC shall exercise due diligence in validating the legal,
technical, and financial capability of the CSG with LCQ or SCQ to
supply and deliver the Goods, or to implement the Simple
Infrastructure Project.
6.4.2 For the procurement of Agricultural and Fishery Products, the
farmer or fisherfolk enterprise or cooperative that submitted the
LCQ or SCQ shall be required to submit within the post- qualification
period the necessary Certificate of Registration issued by the
FFEDIS of the DA, in compliance with the requirements of RA No.
11321 in case such farmer or fisherfolk enterprise or cooperative
has not yet been accredited with the DA prior to submission of
quotation and has not submitted the same in lieu of the required
eligibility documents.
6.4.3 If the BAC determines that the CSG with LCQ or SCQ passes the
criteria for post-qualification, it shall declare the same as the Lowest
Calculated and Responsive Quotation (LCRQ) or Single Calculated
and Responsive Quotation (SCRQ).
In case of post-disqualification, the BAC shall notify the disqualified
CSG and shall initiate and complete the conduct of the postqualification with the next CSG with the second LCQ. If the next
CSG, however, fails the post-qualification, the procedure for postqualification shall be repeated for the next CSG, and so on, until the
LCRQ is determined for award or failure of bidding is declared.
6.4.4 The post-qualification process shall be completed in not more than
ten (10) calendar days from the receipt of notice to the CSG with
the LCQ or SCQ, or in the case of the next CSG with the second
LCQ, the post-qualification shall be completed within a fresh period
of 10 calendar days from the receipt of notice to the next CSG with
the second LCQ. In exceptional cases, the HOPE may approve an
extension of the post-qualification based on the BAC’s
recommendation, but in no case shall the aggregate period exceed
twenty-five (25) calendar days from the determination of the LCQ.
6.5 Award of Contract
6.5.1. The BAC, after determining the legal, technical, and financial
capability and the responsiveness of the quotation, shall
recommend to the HoPE the award of contract in favor of the CSG
with the SCRQ or LCRQ.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
399
6.5.2. Upon approval of the BAC recommendation, the HoPE shall issue a
Notice of Award (NOA) within a period not exceeding ten (10)
calendar days from receipt of BAC’s recommendation and shall
immediately enter into a contract with the CSG.
In case the CSG with the LCRQ or SCRQ fails, refuses, or is unable
to enter into a contract with the PE, without justifiable cause, the
HoPE or his duly authorized representative shall disqualify the CSG
and direct the BAC to determine the responsiveness of the
quotation of the next CSG with the second LCQ, or declare a
failure of bidding and conduct a re-bidding with re-posting, if
necessary, based on its determination, which shall be within seven
(7) calendar days from the said declaration.
6.5.3. The BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post within three (3)
calendar days from execution of the contract, the NOA, the
contract, and the Notice to Proceed (NTP) in the: (i) PhilGEPS
website; (ii) PE’s website, if available; and (iii) conspicuous place
reserved for this purpose in the premises of the PE and in the
community where the project will be implemented.
7. DIRECT PURCHASE FROM LOCAL FARMERS AND FISHERFOLKS
7.1. The PEs may directly purchase locally-produced Agricultural and Fishery
Products from local farmers or local fisherfolks in order to ensure the
availability of the same and promote or support the local farmers and
fisherfolks products in accordance with the mandate of Sagip Saka Act.
7.2. In case of direct purchase, the BAC shall directly negotiate with the local
farmer or fisherfolk, guided by the average prevailing farm-gate price for the
province or the recommended retail price by the local price coordinating
council for commodities sold by farmers or fisherfolks in their respective
provinces, municipalities, and cities.
7.3. The following documentary requirements shall be required by the BAC from
the Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk:
7.3.1. Formal written offer or bid; and
7.3.2. In case of Local Farmer, a certification that the Local Farmer is in the
Registry System for Basic Sectors in Agriculture (RSBSA) or Photocopy of
his RSBSA identification card; and in case of Local Fisherfolk, a
certification that the local fisherfolk is registered in the National Program
for Municipal Fisherfolk Registration (FishR) or Photocopy of his FishR
identification card.
7.4. The BAC, after receipt of the mandatory documentary requirements, shall
exercise due diligence to validate them and the local farmer’s or fisherfolk’s
capability to supply the agricultural or fishery products needed. After such
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
400
confirmation and validation, the BAC shall recommend the award of contract
to the Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk.
7.5. The HoPE shall immediately issue the NOA to the Local Farmer or Local
Fisherfolk. Upon receipt of NOA, the Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk shall
immediately enter into a contract with the PE within a period not exceeding
ten (10) calendar days.
7.6. The PE shall issue the NTP together with a copy or copies of the approved
contract to the Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk within three (3) calendar
days from the date of approval of the contract.
7.7. The BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post within three (3) calendar days
from execution of the contract, the NOA, the contract, and the NTP in the
PhilGEPS website; PE’s website, if available; and conspicuous place reserved
for this purpose in the premises of the PE and in the community where the
project will be implemented.
8. CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION
8.1. Advance payment may be released in an amount not exceeding fifteen
percent (15%) of the total contract price in accordance with the provisions
of the Contract Implementation Guidelines for the Procurement of Goods,
Supplies and Materials, and the Contract Implementation Guidelines for the
Procurement of Infrastructure Projects, or Annexes “D” and “E” of the IRR
of RA No. 9184. The advance payment provided in the said Annexes is
pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 172, s. 2005, issued by the President in
accordance with its authority under Section 88 of Presidential Decree No.
1445 or the “Government Auditing Code of the Philippines.”
8.2. The PE shall require performance and warranty securities for the Organized
CSG, in accordance with Sections 39 and 62 of RA No. 9184 and its 2016
revised IRR. On the other hand, the PE shall determine whether a
performance or warranty security is needed for the Unorganized CSG and
direct purchase from Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk to ensure the faithful
performance of its obligations under the contract.
8.3. In case a different or new works are needed during project implementation,
requests or proposals for any change or variation orders covering Simple
Infrastructure Projects shall be made and evaluated in accordance with the
Contract Implementation Guidelines for the Procurement of Infrastructure
Projects or Annex “E” of the 2016 revised IRR of RA No. 9184.
8.4. The CSG, Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk, shall submit a written request for
payment to the PE, accompanied by an invoice describing as appropriate the
delivery made, quantity and quality of goods delivered, and the amount due
to the CSG, Local Farmer or Local Fisherfolk.
8.5. For Simple Infrastructure Project, the CSG shall submit to the PE a
statement of work accomplished or progress billing, and corresponding
request for progress payment for work accomplished.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
401
8.6. Payment shall be released based on the terms provided in the contract and
only upon validation by the End-User unit that the CSG or Local Farmer or
Local Fisherfolk has delivered or performed the outputs specified in the
contract and the same has been inspected and accepted by the PE as
satisfactory in accordance with the technical specifications or scope of work,
and applicable government budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules.
8.7. In promoting financial inclusivity, the PE shall consider using to the extent
possible authorized digital payment system in its financial transactions,
subject to the applicable government budgeting, accounting, and auditing
rules.
9. EFFECTIVITY
These Guidelines shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
402
Appendix “1”
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES)
CITY/MUNICIPALITY OF ) S.S.
AFFIDAVIT
I, [Name of Affiant], of legal age, [Civil Status], [Nationality], and residing at
[Address of Affiant], after having been duly sworn in accordance with law, do hereby depose
and state that:
1. I am the (Head/ Authorized Representative) of (Name of Community or Social Group);
2. That the incorporators, organizers, officers or members of our organization are the
following:
Name Position
3. Upon consultation and communication with the above-named individuals, I confirm and
certify that:
a. None of us is an agent of or related by consanguinity or affinity up to the third civil
degree to the Head of the Procuring Entity, members of the Bids and Awards
Committee, the Technical Working Group, or the BAC Secretariat, or other officials of
(Name of Procuring Entity) authorized to process and/ or approve the proposal,
contract, and release of funds in favor of the Community or Social Group; and
b. [Include this paragraph if all Organized Community or Social Group officers and
members do not have any related business to the Community-based Project being
procured] None of us has any related business to the Community-based Projects
being procured at hand.
c. [Include this paragraph if any of those identified Organized Community or Social
Group officers or members must disclose his/her related business, including the
extent or percentage of his/her ownership or interest therein.] The following officers
or members of our Organized Community or Social Group has/have related business
to the Community-based Project being procured at hand, including the corresponding
extent or percentage of ownership or interest therein:
Name
Name or Nature
of Related
Business
Extent or Percentage of
Ownership or
Interest in
the Related
Business
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
403
4. [Include this paragraph if no performance or warranty security is prescribed by the
Procuring Entity for Unorganized Community or Social Groups] Considering that the
posting of a performance security has been dispensed with, as determined by the
Procuring Entity, I hereby commit that our Unorganized Community or Social Group
shall perform and deliver all the obligations and undertakings under the contract
covering the procurement at hand. I further agree and accept that our failure to
perform or deliver any of such obligations and undertakings shall result in Blacklisting of
our Community or Social Group for not more than two (2) years in all government
procurement activities following the procedure under RA No. 9184, its revised IRR and
associated issuances.
5. In case advance payment was made or given, failure to perform or deliver any of the
obligations and undertakings in the contract shall be sufficient grounds to constitute
criminal liability for Swindling (Estafa) or the commission of fraud with unfaithfulness or
abuse of confidence through misappropriating or converting any payment received by a
person or entity under an obligation involving the duty to deliver certain goods or
services, to the prejudice of the public and the government of the Philippines pursuant
to Article 315 of Act No. 3815 s. 1930, as amended, or the Revised Penal Code.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this day of , 20 at
, Philippines.
[Insert NAME OF COMMUNITY OR
SOCIAL GROUP REPRESENTATIVE]
[Insert signatory’s legal capacity]
Affiant
[Jurat]
[Format shall be based on the latest Rules on Notarial Practice]
Guidelines for the Conduct of Community Participation
in Procurement
Appendix 35
404
Appendix “2”
STATEMENT OF COMMUNITY GROUP’S
COMPLETED CONTRACTS SIMILAR TO THE COMMUNITY-BASED PROJECT TO BE
BID OR LIST INDICATING THE WORK EXPERIENCES OF MEMBERS
SIMILAR TO THE COMMUNITY-BASED PROJECT TO BE BID
Name of the
Completed
Contract
Contract
Date
Period/
Duration/
Delivery
Date
Amount
Involved
Definition
or
description
of the
project or
major
categories
of work
Supporting
Documentary
Proofs
(e.g. User
acceptance,
Official
Receipts, sales
invoice)
Attached as
Annex “_”
[Insert NAME OF COMMUNITY OR
SOCIAL GROUP
REPRESENTATIVE]
[Insert signatory’s legal capacity]
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND
MANAGEMENTGOVERNMENT
PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD
TECHNICAL SUPPORT OFFICE
Unit 2504 Raffles Corporate Center, F. Ortigas Jr. Road, Ortigas
Center, Pasig CityTel. Nos. (02) 7-900-6741 to 44
www.gppb.gov.ph
ATTY. ROWENA CANDICE M. RUIZ
Executive Director V
ATTY. MARIA DIONESIA A. RIVERA-GUILLERMO
Officer-in-Charge, Deputy Executive Director IV
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT
PROCUREMENT SERVICE
RR Road, Cristobal Street,
Paco, Manila Tel. Nos. (02) 8-
563-9397; (02) 8-563-9395
 www.ps-philgeps.gov.ph
ATTY. DENNIS S. SANTIAGO
Executive Director V
PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT
ELECTRONICPROCUREMENT SYSTEM
5th Floor, Automobile Association of the Philippines
Tower (AAP Tower) - Offices, 683 Aurora Blvd, New
Manila, Quezon City
Tel. Nos. (02) 8-640-6906
www.philgeps.gov.ph
MS. ROSA MARIA CLEMENTE
Director IV